Europe

===Content===
Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere. It is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and Asia to the east. Europe shares the landmass of Eurasia with Asia, and of Afro-Eurasia with both Asia and Africa. Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea, and the waterway of the Bosporus Strait.
Europe covers about 10.18 million km2 (3.93 million sq mi), or 2% of Earth's surface (6.8% of land area), making it the second-smallest continent (using the seven-continent model). Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states, of which Russia is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population. Europe had a total population of about 745 million (about 10% of the world population) in 2
021; the third-largest after Asia and Africa. The European climate is affected by warm Atlantic currents, such as the Gulf Stream, which produce a temperate climate, tempering winters and summers, on much of the continent. Further from the sea, seasonal differences are more noticeable producing more continental climates.
European culture consists of a range of national and regional cultures, which form the central roots of the wider Western civilisation, and together commonly reference ancient Greece and ancient Rome, particularly through their Christian successors, as crucial and shared roots. Beginning with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE, Christian consolidation of Europe in the wake of the Migration Period marked the European post-classical Middle Ages. The Italian Renaissance, radiating from Florence, spread to the rest of the continent a new humanist interest in art and science which led to the modern era. Since the Age of Discovery, led by Spain and Portugal, Europe played a predominant 
role in global affairs with multiple explorations and conquests around the world.
Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers colonised at various times the Americas, almost all of Africa and Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
The Age of Enlightenment, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic Wars shaped the continent culturally, politically and economically from the end of the 17th century until the first half of the 19th century. The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural and social change in Western Europe and eventually the wider world. Both world wars began and were fought to a great extent in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence and competed over dominance in Europe and globally. The resulting Cold War divided Europe along the Iron Curtain, with NATO in the West and the Warsaw Pact in t
he East. This divide ended with the Revolutions of 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which allowed European integration to advance significantly.
European integration is being advanced institutionally since 1948 with the founding of the Council of Europe, and significantly through the realisation of the European Union (EU), which represents today the majority of Europe. The European Union is a supranational political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation and is based on a system of European treaties. The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. A majority of its members have adopted a common currency, the euro, and participate in the European single market and a customs union. A large bloc of countries, the Schengen Area, have also abolished internal border and immigration controls. Regular popular elections take place every five years within the EU; they are considered to be
 the second-largest democratic elections in the world after India's. The EU is the third-largest economy in the world.


== Name ==

The place name Evros was first used by the ancient Greeks to refer to their northernmost province, which bears the same name today. The principal river there – Evros (today's Maritsa) – flows through the fertile valleys of Thrace, which it self was also called Europe, before the term meant the continent.
In classical Greek mythology, Europa (Ancient Greek: Εὐρώπη, Eurṓpē) was a Phoenician princess. One view is that her name derives from the Ancient Greek elements εὐρύς (eurús) 'wide, broad', and ὤψ (ōps, gen. ὠπός, ōpós) 'eye, face, countenance', hence their composite Eurṓpē would mean 'wide-gazing' or 'broad of aspect'. Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it. An alternative view is that of Robert Beekes, who has argued in favour of a pre-Indo-European origin for
 the name, explaining that a derivation from eurus would yield a different toponym than Europa. Beekes has located toponyms related to that of Europa in the territory of ancient Greece, and localities such as that of Europos in ancient Macedonia.
There have been attempts to connect Eurṓpē to a Semitic term for west, this being either Akkadian erebu meaning 'to go down, set' (said of the sun) or Phoenician 'ereb 'evening, west', which is at the origin of Arabic maghreb and Hebrew ma'arav. Martin Litchfield West stated that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor", while Beekes considers a connection to Semitic languages improbable.
Most major world languages use words derived from Eurṓpē or Europa to refer to the continent. Chinese, for example, uses the word Ōuzhōu (歐洲/欧洲), which is an abbreviation of the transliterated name Ōuluóbā zhōu (歐羅巴洲) (zhōu means "continent"); a similar Chinese-derived term Ōshū (欧州) is also so
metimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, Ōshū Rengō (欧州連合), despite the katakana Yōroppa (ヨーロッパ) being more commonly used. In some Turkic languages, the originally Persian name Frangistan ("land of the Franks") is used casually in referring to much of Europe, besides official names such as Avrupa or Evropa.


== Definition ==


=== Contemporary definition ===

The prevalent definition of Europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid-19th century.
Europe is taken to be bounded by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the east and north-east are usually taken to be the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the south-east, the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea, and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.

Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenland is usual
ly assigned to North America, although politically belonging to Denmark. Nevertheless, there are some exceptions based on sociopolitical and cultural differences. Cyprus is closest to Anatolia (or Asia Minor), but is considered part of Europe politically and it is a member state of the EU. Malta was considered an island of North-western Africa for centuries, but now it is considered to be part of Europe as well. "Europe", as used specifically in British English, may also refer to Continental Europe exclusively.
The term "continent" usually implies the physical geography of a large land mass completely or almost completely surrounded by water at its borders. Prior to the adoption of the current convention that includes mountain divides, the border between Europe and Asia had been redefined several times since its first conception in classical antiquity, but always as a series of rivers, seas and straits that were believed to extend an unknown distance east and north from the Mediterranean Sea without the inclu
sion of any mountain ranges. Cartographer Herman Moll suggested in 1715 Europe was bounded by a series of partly-joined waterways directed towards the Turkish straits, and the Irtysh River draining into the upper part of the Ob River and the Arctic Ocean. In contrast, the present eastern boundary of Europe partially adheres to the Ural and Caucasus Mountains, which is somewhat arbitrary and inconsistent compared to any clear-cut definition of the term "continent".
The current division of Eurasia into two continents now reflects East-West cultural, linguistic and ethnic differences which vary on a spectrum rather than with a sharp dividing line. The geographic border between Europe and Asia does not follow any state boundaries and now only follows a few bodies of water. Turkey is generally considered a transcontinental country divided entirely by water, while Russia and Kazakhstan are only partly divided by waterways. France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain are also transcontinental (or more properly, inte
rcontinental, when oceans or large seas are involved) in that their main land areas are in Europe while pockets of their territories are located on other continents separated from Europe by large bodies of water. Spain, for example, has territories south of the Mediterranean Sea—namely, Ceuta and Melilla—which are parts of Africa and share a border with Morocco. According to the current convention, Georgia and Azerbaijan are transcontinental countries where waterways have been completely replaced by mountains as the divide between continents.


=== History of the concept ===


==== Early history ====

The first recorded usage of Eurṓpē as a geographic term is in the Homeric Hymn to Delian Apollo, in reference to the western shore of the Aegean Sea. As a name for a part of the known world, it is first used in the 6th century BCE by Anaximander and Hecataeus. Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni River on the territory of Georgia) in the Caucasus
, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BCE. Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts—Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa)—with the Nile and the Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia. Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don. The Book of Jubilees described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from Northwest Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.
The convention received by the Middle Ages and surviving into modern usage is that of the Roman era used by Roman-era authors such as Posidonius, Strabo and Ptolemy, who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
The Roman Empire did not attach a strong identity to the concept of contine
ntal divisions. However, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of "Europe". The term "Europe" is first used for a cultural sphere in the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century. From that time, the term designated the sphere of influence of the Western Church, as opposed to both the Eastern Orthodox churches and to the Islamic world.
A cultural definition of Europe as the lands of Latin Christendom coalesced in the 8th century, signifying the new cultural condominium created through the confluence of Germanic traditions and Christian-Latin culture, defined partly in contrast with Byzantium and Islam, and limited to northern Iberia, the British Isles, France, Christianised western Germany, the Alpine regions and northern and central Italy. The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: Europa often figures in the letters of Charlemagne's court sch
olar, Alcuin. The transition of Europe to being a cultural term as well as a geographic one led to the borders of Europe being affected by cultural considerations in the East, especially relating to areas under Byzantine, Ottoman, and Russian influence. Such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term Europe by its users. Such cultural considerations were not applied to the Americas, despite their conquest and settlement by European states. Instead, the concept of "Western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together Europe and these colonies.


==== Modern definitions ====

The question of defining a precise eastern boundary of Europe arises in the Early Modern period, as the eastern extension of Muscovy began to include North Asia. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the 18th century, the traditional division of the landmass of Eurasia into two continents, Europe and Asia, followed Ptolemy, with the boundary following the Turkish Straits, the Black Sea, the Kerch Str
ait, the Sea of Azov and the Don (ancient Tanais). But maps produced during the 16th to 18th centuries tended to differ in how to continue the boundary beyond the Don bend at Kalach-na-Donu (where it is closest to the Volga, now joined with it by the Volga–Don Canal), into territory not described in any detail by the ancient geographers.
Around 1715, Herman Moll produced a map showing the northern part of the Ob River and the Irtysh River, a major tributary of the Ob, as components of a series of partly-joined waterways taking the boundary between Europe and Asia from the Turkish Straits, and the Don River all the way to the Arctic Ocean. In 1721, he produced a more up to date map that was easier to read. However, his proposal to adhere to major rivers as the line of demarcation was never taken up by other geographers who were beginning to move away from the idea of water boundaries as the only legitimate divides between Europe and Asia.
Four years later, in 1725, Philip Johan von Strahlenberg was the first
 to depart from the classical Don boundary. He drew a new line along the Volga, following the Volga north until the Samara Bend, along Obshchy Syrt (the drainage divide between the Volga and Ural Rivers), then north and east along the latter waterway to its source in the Ural Mountains. At this point he proposed that mountain ranges could be included as boundaries between continents as alternatives to nearby waterways. Accordingly, he drew the new boundary north along Ural Mountains rather than the nearby and parallel running Ob and Irtysh rivers. This was endorsed by the Russian Empire and introduced the convention that would eventually become commonly accepted. However, this did not come without criticism. Voltaire, writing in 1760 about Peter the Great's efforts to make Russia more European, ignored the whole boundary question with his claim that neither Russia, Scandinavia, northern Germany, nor Poland were fully part of Europe. Since then, many modern analytical geographers like Halford Mackinder have de
clared that they see little validity in the Ural Mountains as a boundary between continents.
The mapmakers continued to differ on the boundary between the lower Don and Samara well into the 19th century. The 1745 atlas published by the Russian Academy of Sciences has the boundary follow the Don beyond Kalach as far as Serafimovich before cutting north towards Arkhangelsk, while other 18th- to 19th-century mapmakers such as John Cary followed Strahlenberg's prescription. To the south, the Kuma–Manych Depression was identified c. 1773 by a German naturalist, Peter Simon Pallas, as a valley that once connected the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, and subsequently was proposed as a natural boundary between continents.
By the mid-19th century, there were three main conventions, one following the Don, the Volga–Don Canal and the Volga, the other following the Kuma–Manych Depression to the Caspian and then the Ural River, and the third abandoning the Don altogether, following the Greater Caucasus watershed to 
the Caspian. The question was still treated as a "controversy" in geographical literature of the 1860s, with Douglas Freshfield advocating the Caucasus crest boundary as the "best possible", citing support from various "modern geographers".
In Russia and the Soviet Union, the boundary along the Kuma–Manych Depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906. In 1958, the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay, on the Kara Sea, along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains, then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills, and then the Emba River; and Kuma–Manych Depression, thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe. The Flora Europaea adopted a boundary along the Terek and Kuban rivers, so southwards from the Kuma and the Manych, but still with the Caucasus entirely in Asia. However, most geographers in the Soviet Union favoured the boundary along the Caucasus crest, 
and this became the common convention in the later 20th century, although the Kuma–Manych boundary remained in use in some 20th-century maps.
Some view the separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country. [...]."


== History ==


=== Prehistory ===

During the 2.5 million years of the Pleistocene, numerous cold phases called glacials (Quaternary ice age), or significant advances of continental ice sheets, in Europe and North America, occurred at intervals of approximately 40,000 to 100,000 years. The long glacial periods were separated by more temperate and shorter interglacials which lasted about 10,000–15,000 years. The last cold episode of the last glacial period ended about 10,000 years ago. Earth is currently in an interglacial period of the Quaternary, called the Holocene.
Homo erectus georgicus, which lived roughly 1.8 million ye
ars ago in Georgia, is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in Europe. Other hominin remains, dating back roughly 1 million years, have been discovered in Atapuerca, Spain. Neanderthal man (named after the Neandertal valley in Germany) appeared in Europe 150,000 years ago (115,000 years ago it is found already in the territory of present-day Poland) and disappeared from the fossil record about 40,000 years ago, with their final refuge being the Iberian Peninsula. The Neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans (Cro-Magnons), who appeared in Europe around 43,000 to 40,000 years ago. Homo sapiens arrived in Europe around 54,000 years ago, some 10,000 years earlier than previously thought. The earliest sites in Europe dated 48,000 years ago are Riparo Mochi (Italy), Geissenklösterle (Germany) and Isturitz (France).
The European Neolithic period—marked by the cultivation of crops and the raising of livestock, increased numbers of settlements and the widespread use of pottery—began around 7000 BCE i
n Greece and the Balkans, probably influenced by earlier farming practices in Anatolia and the Near East. It spread from the Balkans along the valleys of the Danube and the Rhine (Linear Pottery culture), and along the Mediterranean coast (Cardial culture). Between 4500 and 3000 BCE, these central European neolithic cultures developed further to the west and the north, transmitting newly acquired skills in producing copper artifacts. In Western Europe the Neolithic period was characterised not by large agricultural settlements but by field monuments, such as causewayed enclosures, burial mounds and megalithic tombs. The Corded Ware cultural horizon flourished at the transition from the Neolithic to the Chalcolithic. During this period giant megalithic monuments, such as the Megalithic Temples of Malta and Stonehenge, were constructed throughout Western and Southern Europe.
The modern native populations of Europe largely descend from three distinct lineages: Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, descended from populati
ons associated with the Paleolithic Epigravettian culture; Neolithic Early European Farmers who migrated from Anatolia during the Neolithic Revolution 9,000 years ago; and Yamnaya Steppe herders who expanded into Europe from the Pontic–Caspian steppe of Ukraine and southern Russia in the context of Indo-European migrations 5,000 years ago. The European Bronze Age began c. 3200 BCE in Greece with the Minoan civilisation on Crete, the first advanced civilisation in Europe. The Minoans were followed by the Myceneans, who collapsed suddenly around 1200 BCE, ushering the European Iron Age. Iron Age colonisation by the Greeks and Phoenicians gave rise to early Mediterranean cities. Early Iron Age Italy and Greece from around the 8th century BCE gradually gave rise to historical Classical antiquity, whose beginning is sometimes dated to 776 BCE, the year of the first Olympic Games.


=== Classical antiquity ===

Ancient Greece was the founding culture of Western civilisation. Western democratic and rationalist cul
ture are often attributed to Ancient Greece. The Greek city-state, the polis, was the fundamental political unit of classical Greece. In 508 BCE, Cleisthenes instituted the world's first democratic system of government in Athens. The Greek political ideals were rediscovered in the late 18th century by European philosophers and idealists. Greece also generated many cultural contributions: in philosophy, humanism and rationalism under Aristotle, Socrates and Plato; in history with Herodotus and Thucydides; in dramatic and narrative verse, starting with the epic poems of Homer; in drama with Sophocles and Euripides; in medicine with Hippocrates and Galen; and in science with Pythagoras, Euclid and Archimedes. In the course of the 5th century BCE, several of the Greek city states would ultimately check the Achaemenid Persian advance in Europe through the Greco-Persian Wars, considered a pivotal moment in world history, as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as Golden Age of Athens, the seminal period of
 ancient Greece that laid many of the foundations of Western civilisation.

Greece was followed by Rome, which left its mark on law, politics, language, engineering, architecture, government and many more key aspects in western civilisation. By 200 BCE, Rome had conquered Italy and over the following two centuries it conquered Greece and Hispania (Spain and Portugal), the North African coast, much of the Middle East, Gaul (France and Belgium) and Britannia (England and Wales).
Expanding from their base in central Italy beginning in the third century BCE, the Romans gradually expanded to eventually rule the entire Mediterranean Basin and Western Europe by the turn of the millennium. The Roman Republic ended in 27 BCE, when Augustus proclaimed the Roman Empire. The two centuries that followed are known as the pax romana, a period of unprecedented peace, prosperity and political stability in most of Europe. The empire continued to expand under emperors such as Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, who spent time o
n the Empire's northern border fighting Germanic, Pictish and Scottish tribes. Christianity was legalised by Constantine I in 313 CE after three centuries of imperial persecution. Constantine also permanently moved the capital of the empire from Rome to the city of Byzantium (modern-day Istanbul) which was renamed Constantinople in his honour in 330 CE. Christianity became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 CE and in 391–392 CE, the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions. This is sometimes considered to mark the end of antiquity; alternatively antiquity is considered to end with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE; the closure of the pagan Platonic Academy of Athens in 529 CE; or the rise of Islam in the early 7th century CE. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe.


=== Early Middle Ages ===

During the decline of the Roman Empire, Europe entered a long period of change arising from what 
historians call the "Age of Migrations". There were numerous invasions and migrations amongst the Ostrogoths, Visigoths, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, Angles, Saxons, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars and, later on, the Vikings, Pechenegs, Cumans and Magyars. Renaissance thinkers such as Petrarch would later refer to this as the "Dark Ages".
Isolated monastic communities were the only places to safeguard and compile written knowledge accumulated previously; apart from this very few written records survive and much literature, philosophy, mathematics and other thinking from the classical period disappeared from Western Europe, though they were preserved in the east, in the Byzantine Empire.
While the Roman empire in the west continued to decline, Roman traditions and the Roman state remained strong in the predominantly Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was the most powerful economic, cultural and military force in Europe. Emperor Jus
tinian I presided over Constantinople's first golden age: he established a legal code that forms the basis of many modern legal systems, funded the construction of the Hagia Sophia and brought the Christian church under state control.
From the 7th century onwards, as the Byzantines and neighbouring Sasanid Persians were severely weakened due to the protracted, centuries-lasting and frequent Byzantine–Sasanian wars, the Muslim Arabs began to make inroads into historically Roman territory, taking the Levant and North Africa and making inroads into Asia Minor. In the mid-7th century, following the Muslim conquest of Persia, Islam penetrated into the Caucasus region. Over the next centuries Muslim forces took Cyprus, Malta, Crete, Sicily and parts of southern Italy. Between 711 and 720, most of the lands of the Visigothic Kingdom of Iberia was brought under Muslim rule—save for small areas in the north-west (Asturias) and largely Basque regions in the Pyrenees. This territory, under the Arabic name Al-Andalus
, became part of the expanding Umayyad Caliphate. The unsuccessful second siege of Constantinople (717) weakened the Umayyad dynasty and reduced their prestige. The Umayyads were then defeated by the Frankish leader Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers in 732, which ended their northward advance. In the remote regions of north-western Iberia and the middle Pyrenees the power of the Muslims in the south was scarcely felt. It was here that the foundations of the Christian kingdoms of Asturias, Leon and Galicia were laid and from where the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula would start. However, no coordinated attempt would be made to drive the Moors out. The Christian kingdoms were mainly focused on their own internal power struggles. As a result, the Reconquista took the greater part of eight hundred years, in which period a long list of Alfonsos, Sanchos, Ordoños, Ramiros, Fernandos and Bermudos would be fighting their Christian rivals as much as the Muslim invaders.

During the Dark Ages, the Western R
oman Empire fell under the control of various tribes. The Germanic and Slav tribes established their domains over Western and Eastern Europe, respectively. Eventually the Frankish tribes were united under Clovis I. Charlemagne, a Frankish king of the Carolingian dynasty who had conquered most of Western Europe, was anointed "Holy Roman Emperor" by the Pope in 800. This led in 962 to the founding of the Holy Roman Empire, which eventually became centred in the German principalities of central Europe.
East Central Europe saw the creation of the first Slavic states and the adoption of Christianity (c. 1000 CE). The powerful West Slavic state of Great Moravia spread its territory all the way south to the Balkans, reaching its largest territorial extent under Svatopluk I and causing a series of armed conflicts with East Francia. Further south, the first South Slavic states emerged in the late 7th and 8th century and adopted Christianity: the First Bulgarian Empire, the Serbian Principality (later Kingdom and Empir
e) and the Duchy of Croatia (later Kingdom of Croatia). To the East, Kievan Rus' expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century. In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the religion of state. Further East, Volga Bulgaria became an Islamic state in the 10th century, but was eventually absorbed into Russia several centuries later.


=== High and Late Middle Ages ===

The period between the year 1000 and 1250 is known as the High Middle Ages, followed by the Late Middle Ages until c. 1500.
During the High Middle Ages the population of Europe experienced significant growth, culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century. Economic growth, together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes, made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas. The growing wealth and independence acquired by some coastal cities gave the Maritime Republics a leading role in the European scene.
The
 Middle Ages on the mainland were dominated by the two upper echelons of the social structure: the nobility and the clergy. Feudalism developed in France in the Early Middle Ages, and soon spread throughout Europe. A struggle for influence between the nobility and the monarchy in England led to the writing of Magna Carta and the establishment of a parliament. The primary source of culture in this period came from the Roman Catholic Church. Through monasteries and cathedral schools, the Church was responsible for education in much of Europe.

The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages. An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously, with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire. In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land. In Europe itself, the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics. In the Iberian Peninsula, the Reconquis
ta concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492, ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the south-western peninsula.
In the east, a resurgent Byzantine Empire recaptured Crete and Cyprus from the Muslims, and reconquered the Balkans. Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe from the 9th to the 12th centuries, with a population of approximately 400,000. The Empire was weakened following the defeat at Manzikert, and was weakened considerably by the sack of Constantinople in 1204, during the Fourth Crusade. Although it would recover Constantinople in 1261, Byzantium fell in 1453 when Constantinople was taken by the Ottoman Empire.

In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Pechenegs and the Cuman-Kipchaks, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, and temporarily halted the expansion of the Rus' state to the south and east. Like many other parts of Eurasia, these territories were 
overrun by the Mongols. The invaders, who became known as Tatars, were mostly Turkic-speaking peoples under Mongol suzerainty. They established the state of the Golden Horde with headquarters in Crimea, which later adopted Islam as a religion, and ruled over modern-day southern and central Russia for more than three centuries. After the collapse of Mongol dominions, the first Romanian states (principalities) emerged in the 14th century: Moldavia and Walachia. Previously, these territories were under the successive control of Pechenegs and Cumans. From the 12th to the 15th centuries, the Grand Duchy of Moscow grew from a small principality under Mongol rule to the largest state in Europe, overthrowing the Mongols in 1480, and eventually becoming the Tsardom of Russia. The state was consolidated under Ivan III the Great and Ivan the Terrible, steadily expanding to the east and south over the next centuries.
The Great Famine of 1315–1317 was the first crisis that would strike Europe in the late Middle Ages. Th
e period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss. The population of France was reduced by half. Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines, and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period. Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death, one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe alone—a third of the European population at the time.
The plague had a devastating effect on Europe's social structure; it induced people to live for the moment as illustrated by Giovanni Boccaccio in The Decameron (1353). It was a serious blow to the Roman Catholic Church and led to increased persecution of Jews, beggars and lepers. The plague is thought to have returned every generation with varying virulence and mortalities until the 18th century. During this period, more than 100 plague epidemics swept across Europe.


=== Early modern period ===

The Renaissance was a period of cultural change originating in Florence, and
 later spreading to the rest of Europe. The rise of a new humanism was accompanied by the recovery of forgotten classical Greek and Arabic knowledge from monastic libraries, often translated from Arabic into Latin. The Renaissance spread across Europe between the 14th and 16th centuries: it saw the flowering of art, philosophy, music, and the sciences, under the joint patronage of royalty, the nobility, the Roman Catholic Church and an emerging merchant class. Patrons in Italy, including the Medici family of Florentine bankers and the Popes in Rome, funded prolific quattrocento and cinquecento artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci.
Political intrigue within the Church in the mid-14th century caused the Western Schism. During this forty-year period, two popes—one in Avignon and one in Rome—claimed rulership over the Church. Although the schism was eventually healed in 1417, the papacy's spiritual authority had suffered greatly. In the 15th century, Europe started to extend itself beyo
nd its geographic frontiers. Spain and Portugal, the greatest naval powers of the time, took the lead in exploring the world. Exploration reached the Southern Hemisphere in the Atlantic and the southern tip of Africa. Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492, and Vasco da Gama opened the ocean route to the East linking the Atlantic and Indian Oceans in 1498. The Portuguese-born explorer Ferdinand Magellan reached Asia westward across the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans in a Spanish expedition, resulting in the first circumnavigation of the globe, completed by the Spaniard Juan Sebastián Elcano (1519–1522). Soon after, the Spanish and Portuguese began establishing large global empires in the Americas, Asia, Africa and Oceania. France, the Netherlands and England soon followed in building large colonial empires with vast holdings in Africa, the Americas and Asia. In 1588, a Spanish armada failed to invade England. A year later England tried unsuccessfully to invade Spain, allowing Philip II of Spai
n to maintain his dominant war capacity in Europe. This English disaster also allowed the Spanish fleet to retain its capability to wage war for the next decades. However, two more Spanish armadas failed to invade England (2nd Spanish Armada and 3rd Spanish Armada).

The Church's power was further weakened by the Protestant Reformation in 1517 when German theologian Martin Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses criticising the selling of indulgences to the church door. He was subsequently excommunicated in the papal bull Exsurge Domine in 1520 and his followers were condemned in the 1521 Diet of Worms, which divided German princes between Protestant and Roman Catholic faiths. Religious fighting and warfare spread with Protestantism. The plunder of the empires of the Americas allowed Spain to finance religious persecution in Europe for over a century. The Thirty Years War (1618–1648) crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population. In the after
math of the Peace of Westphalia, France rose to predominance within Europe. The defeat of the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Vienna in 1683 marked the historic end of Ottoman expansion into Europe.
The 17th century in Central and parts of Eastern Europe was a period of general decline; the region experienced more than 150 famines in a 200-year period between 1501 and 1700. From the Union of Krewo (1385) east-central Europe was dominated by the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The hegemony of the vast Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had ended with the devastation brought by the Second Northern War (Deluge) and subsequent conflicts; the state itself was partitioned and ceased to exist at the end of the 18th century.
From the 15th to 18th centuries, when the disintegrating khanates of the Golden Horde were conquered by Russia, Tatars from the Crimean Khanate frequently raided Eastern Slavic lands to capture slaves. Further east, the Nogai Horde and Kazakh Khanate frequently raided the Slavic-
speaking areas of contemporary Russia and Ukraine for hundreds of years, until the Russian expansion and conquest of most of northern Eurasia (i.e. Eastern Europe, Central Asia and Siberia).
The Renaissance and the New Monarchs marked the start of an Age of Discovery, a period of exploration, invention and scientific development. Among the great figures of the Western scientific revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries were Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Isaac Newton. According to Peter Barrett, "It is widely accepted that 'modern science' arose in the Europe of the 17th century (towards the end of the Renaissance), introducing a new understanding of the natural world."


=== 18th and 19th centuries ===

The Seven Years' War brought to an end the "Old System" of alliances in Europe. Consequently, when the American Revolutionary War turned into a global war between 1778 and 1783, Britain found itself opposed by a strong coalition of European powers, and lacking any substantial ally.
The Age of Enlightenment 
was a powerful intellectual movement during the 18th century promoting scientific and reason-based thoughts. Discontent with the aristocracy and clergy's monopoly on political power in France resulted in the French Revolution, and the establishment of the First Republic as a result of which the monarchy and many of the nobility perished during the initial reign of terror. Napoleon Bonaparte rose to power in the aftermath of the French Revolution, and established the First French Empire that, during the Napoleonic Wars, grew to encompass large parts of Europe before collapsing in 1815 with the Battle of Waterloo. Napoleonic rule resulted in the further dissemination of the ideals of the French Revolution, including that of the nation state, as well as the widespread adoption of the French models of administration, law and education. The Congress of Vienna, convened after Napoleon's downfall, established a new balance of power in Europe centred on the five "Great Powers": the UK, France, Prussia, Austria and Ru
ssia. This balance would remain in place until the Revolutions of 1848, during which liberal uprisings affected all of Europe except for Russia and the UK. These revolutions were eventually put down by conservative elements and few reforms resulted. The year 1859 saw the unification of Romania, as a nation state, from smaller principalities. In 1867, the Austro-Hungarian empire was formed; 1871 saw the unifications of both Italy and Germany as nation-states from smaller principalities.
In parallel, the Eastern Question grew more complex ever since the Ottoman defeat in the Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774). As the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire seemed imminent, the Great Powers struggled to safeguard their strategic and commercial interests in the Ottoman domains. The Russian Empire stood to benefit from the decline, whereas the Habsburg Empire and Britain perceived the preservation of the Ottoman Empire to be in their best interests. Meanwhile, the Serbian Revolution (1804) and Greek War of Independence (18
21) marked the beginning of the end of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, which ended with the Balkan Wars in 1912–1913. Formal recognition of the de facto independent principalities of Montenegro, Serbia and Romania ensued at the Congress of Berlin in 1878.

The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout Europe. The invention and implementation of new technologies resulted in rapid urban growth, mass employment and the rise of a new working class. Reforms in social and economic spheres followed, including the first laws on child labour, the legalisation of trade unions, and the abolition of slavery. In Britain, the Public Health Act of 1875 was passed, which significantly improved living conditions in many British cities. Europe's population increased from about 100 million in 1700 to 400 million by 1900. The last major famine recorded in Western Europe, the Great Famine of Ireland, caused death and mass emigration of millions of Irish people. In the
 19th century, 70 million people left Europe in migrations to various European colonies abroad and to the United States. The industrial revolution also led to large population growth, and the share of the world population living in Europe reached a peak of slightly above 25% around the year 1913.


=== 20th century to the present ===

Two world wars and an economic depression dominated the first half of the 20th century. The First World War was fought between 1914 and 1918. It started when Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated by the Yugoslav nationalist Gavrilo Princip. Most European nations were drawn into the war, which was fought between the Entente Powers (France, Belgium, Serbia, Portugal, Russia, the United Kingdom, and later Italy, Greece, Romania, and the United States) and the Central Powers (Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire). The war left more than 16 million civilians and military dead. Over 60 million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918.

Ru
ssia was plunged into the Russian Revolution, which threw down the Tsarist monarchy and replaced it with the communist Soviet Union, leading also to the independence of many former Russian governorates, such as Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as new European countries. Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire collapsed and broke up into separate nations, and many other nations had their borders redrawn. The Treaty of Versailles, which officially ended the First World War in 1919, was harsh towards Germany, upon whom it placed full responsibility for the war and imposed heavy sanctions. Excess deaths in Russia over the course of the First World War and the Russian Civil War (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined total of 18 million. In 1932–1933, under Stalin's leadership, confiscations of grain by the Soviet authorities contributed to the second Soviet famine which caused millions of deaths; surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour. Stalin was also re
sponsible for the Great Purge of 1937–38 in which the NKVD executed 681,692 people; millions of people were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.

The social revolutions sweeping through Russia also affected other European nations following The Great War: in 1919, with the Weimar Republic in Germany and the First Austrian Republic; in 1922, with Mussolini's one-party fascist government in the Kingdom of Italy and in Atatürk's Turkish Republic, adopting the Western alphabet and state secularism.
Economic instability, caused in part by debts incurred in the First World War and 'loans' to Germany played havoc in Europe in the late 1920s and 1930s. This, and the Wall Street Crash of 1929, brought about the worldwide Great Depression. Helped by the economic crisis, social instability and the threat of communism, fascist movements developed throughout Europe placing Adolf Hitler in power of what became Nazi Germany.
In 1933, Hitler became the leader of Germany and began to work towards his goa
l of building Greater Germany. Germany re-expanded and took back the Saarland and Rhineland in 1935 and 1936. In 1938, Austria became a part of Germany following the Anschluss. Later that year, following the Munich Agreement signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Italy, Germany annexed the Sudetenland, which was a part of Czechoslovakia inhabited by ethnic Germans, and in early 1939, the remainder of Czechoslovakia was split into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, controlled by Germany and the Slovak Republic. At the time, the United Kingdom and France preferred a policy of appeasement.
With tensions mounting between Germany and Poland over the future of Danzig, the Germans turned to the Soviets and signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which allowed the Soviets to invade the Baltic states and parts of Poland and Romania. Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, prompting France and the United Kingdom to declare war on Germany on 3 September, opening the European Theatre of the Second Wor
ld War. The Soviet invasion of Poland started on 17 September and Poland fell soon thereafter. On 24 September, the Soviet Union attacked the Baltic countries and, on 30 November, Finland, the latter of which was followed by the devastating Winter War for the Red Army. The British hoped to land at Narvik and send troops to aid Finland, but their primary objective in the landing was to encircle Germany and cut the Germans off from Scandinavian resources. Around the same time, Germany moved troops into Denmark. The Phoney War continued.
In May 1940, Germany attacked France through the Low Countries. France capitulated in June 1940. By August, Germany had begun a bombing offensive against the United Kingdom but failed to convince the Britons to give up. In 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa. On 7 December 1941 Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor drew the United States into the conflict as allies of the British Empire, and other allied forces.

After the staggering Battle of Stalingrad in 1
943, the German offensive in the Soviet Union turned into a continual fallback. The Battle of Kursk, which involved the largest tank battle in history, was the last major German offensive on the Eastern Front. In June 1944, British and American forces invaded France in the D-Day landings, opening a new front against Germany. Berlin finally fell in 1945, ending the Second World War in Europe. The war was the largest and most destructive in human history, with 60 million dead across the world. More than 40 million people in Europe had died as a result of the Second World War, including between 11 and 17 million people who perished during the Holocaust. The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people (mostly civilians) during the war, about half of all Second World War casualties. By the end of the Second World War, Europe had more than 40 million refugees. Several post-war expulsions in Central and Eastern Europe displaced a total of about 20 million people.
The First World War, and especially the Second World W
ar, diminished the eminence of Western Europe in world affairs. After the Second World War the map of Europe was redrawn at the Yalta Conference and divided into two blocs, the Western countries and the communist Eastern bloc, separated by what was later called by Winston Churchill an "Iron Curtain". The United States and Western Europe established the NATO alliance and, later, the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact. Particular hot spots after the Second World War were Berlin and Trieste, whereby the Free Territory of Trieste, founded in 1947 with the UN, was dissolved in 1954 and 1975, respectively. The Berlin blockade in 1948 and 1949 and the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961 were one of the great international crises of the Cold War.
The two new superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, became locked in a fifty-year-long Cold War, centred on nuclear proliferation. At the same time decolonisation, which had already started after the First World War, gradually result
ed in the independence of most of the European colonies in Asia and Africa.

In the 1980s the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev and the Solidarity movement in Poland weakened the previously rigid communist system. The opening of the Iron Curtain at the Pan-European Picnic then set in motion a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which the Eastern bloc, the Warsaw Pact and other communist states collapsed, and the Cold War ended. Germany was reunited, after the symbolic fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the maps of Central and Eastern Europe were redrawn once more. This made old previously interrupted cultural and economic relationships possible, and previously isolated cities such as Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest and Trieste were now again in the centre of Europe.
European integration also grew after the Second World War. In 1949 the Council of Europe was founded, following a speech by Sir Winston Churchill, with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals. It includes all European states except for
 Belarus, Russia, and Vatican City. The Treaty of Rome in 1957 established the European Economic Community between six Western European states with the goal of a unified economic policy and common market. In 1967 the EEC, European Coal and Steel Community, and Euratom formed the European Community, which in 1993 became the European Union. The EU established a parliament, court and central bank, and introduced the euro as a unified currency. Between 2004 and 2013, more Central European countries began joining, expanding the EU to 28 European countries and once more making Europe a major economical and political centre of power. However, the United Kingdom withdrew from the EU on 31 January 2020, as a result of a June 2016 referendum on EU membership. The Russo-Ukrainian conflict, which has been ongoing since 2014, steeply escalated when Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, marking the largest humanitarian and refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World War and the Yugoslav 
Wars.


== Geography ==

Europe makes up the western fifth of the Eurasian landmass. It has a higher ratio of coast to landmass than any other continent or subcontinent. Its maritime borders consist of the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Mediterranean, Black and Caspian Seas to the south.
Land relief in Europe shows great variation within relatively small areas. The southern regions are more mountainous, while moving north the terrain descends from the high Alps, Pyrenees and Carpathians, through hilly uplands, into broad, low northern plains, which are vast in the east. This extended lowland is known as the Great European Plain and at its heart lies the North German Plain. An arc of uplands also exists along the north-western seaboard, which begins in the western parts of the islands of Britain and Ireland, and then continues along the mountainous, fjord-cut spine of Norway.
This description is simplified. Subregions such as the Iberian Peninsula and the Italian Peninsula co
ntain their own complex features, as does mainland Central Europe itself, where the relief contains many plateaus, river valleys and basins that complicate the general trend. Sub-regions like Iceland, Britain and Ireland are special cases. The former is a land unto itself in the northern ocean that is counted as part of Europe, while the latter are upland areas that were once joined to the mainland until rising sea levels cut them off.


=== Climate ===

Europe lies mainly in the temperate climate zone of the northern hemisphere, where the prevailing wind direction is from the west. The climate is milder in comparison to other areas of the same latitude around the globe due to the influence of the Gulf Stream, an ocean current which carries warm water from the Gulf of Mexico across the Atlantic ocean to Europe. The Gulf Stream is nicknamed "Europe's central heating", because it makes Europe's climate warmer and wetter than it would otherwise be. The Gulf Stream not only carries warm water to Europe's coast bu
t also warms up the prevailing westerly winds that blow across the continent from the Atlantic Ocean.
Therefore, the average temperature throughout the year of Aveiro is 16 °C (61 °F), while it is only 13 °C (55 °F) in New York City which is almost on the same latitude, bordering the same ocean. Berlin, Germany; Calgary, Canada; and Irkutsk, in far south-eastern Russia, lie on around the same latitude; January temperatures in Berlin average around 8 °C (14 °F) higher than those in Calgary and they are almost 22 °C (40 °F) higher than average temperatures in Irkutsk.
The large water masses of the Mediterranean Sea, which equalise the temperatures on an annual and daily average, are also of particular importance. The water of the Mediterranean extends from the Sahara desert to the Alpine arc in its northernmost part of the Adriatic Sea near Trieste.
In general, Europe is not just colder towards the north compared to the south, but it also gets colder from the west towards the east. The climate is more o
ceanic in the west and less so in the east. This can be illustrated by the following table of average temperatures at locations roughly following the 64th, 60th, 55th, 50th, 45th and 40th latitudes. None of them is located at high altitude; most of them are close to the sea.

It is notable how the average temperatures for the coldest month, as well as the annual average temperatures, drop from the west to the east. For instance, Edinburgh is warmer than Belgrade during the coldest month of the year, although Belgrade is around 10° of latitude farther south.


=== Climate change ===


=== Geology ===

The geological history of Europe traces back to the formation of the Baltic Shield (Fennoscandia) and the Sarmatian craton, both around 2.25 billion years ago, followed by the Volgo–Uralia shield, the three together leading to the East European craton (≈ Baltica) which became a part of the supercontinent Columbia. Around 1.1 billion years ago, Baltica and Arctica (as part of the Laurentia block) became joine
d to Rodinia, later resplitting around 550 million years ago to reform as Baltica. Around 440 million years ago Euramerica was formed from Baltica and Laurentia; a further joining with Gondwana then leading to the formation of Pangea. Around 190 million years ago, Gondwana and Laurasia split apart due to the widening of the Atlantic Ocean. Finally and very soon afterwards, Laurasia itself split up again, into Laurentia (North America) and the Eurasian continent. The land connection between the two persisted for a considerable time, via Greenland, leading to interchange of animal species. From around 50 million years ago, rising and falling sea levels have determined the actual shape of Europe and its connections with continents such as Asia. Europe's present shape dates to the late Tertiary period about five million years ago.
The geology of Europe is hugely varied and complex and gives rise to the wide variety of landscapes found across the continent, from the Scottish Highlands to the rolling plains of Hung
ary. Europe's most significant feature is the dichotomy between highland and mountainous Southern Europe and a vast, partially underwater, northern plain ranging from Ireland in the west to the Ural Mountains in the east. These two halves are separated by the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and Alps/Carpathians. The northern plains are delimited in the west by the Scandinavian Mountains and the mountainous parts of the British Isles. Major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the Celtic Sea, the North Sea, the Baltic Sea complex and Barents Sea.
The northern plain contains the old geological continent of Baltica and so may be regarded geologically as the "main continent", while peripheral highlands and mountainous regions in the south and west constitute fragments from various other geological continents. Most of the older geology of western Europe existed as part of the ancient microcontinent Avalonia.


=== Flora ===

Having lived side by side with agricultural peoples for millen
nia, Europe's animals and plants have been profoundly affected by the presence and activities of humans. With the exception of Fennoscandia and northern Russia, few areas of untouched wilderness are currently found in Europe, except for various national parks.
The main natural vegetation cover in Europe is mixed forest. The conditions for growth are very favourable. In the north, the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift warm the continent. Southern Europe has a warm but mild climate. There are frequent summer droughts in this region. Mountain ridges also affect the conditions. Some of these, such as the Alps and the Pyrenees, are oriented east–west and allow the wind to carry large masses of water from the ocean in the interior. Others are oriented south–north (Scandinavian Mountains, Dinarides, Carpathians, Apennines) and because the rain falls primarily on the side of mountains that is oriented towards the sea, forests grow well on this side, while on the other side, the conditions are much less favoura
ble. Few corners of mainland Europe have not been grazed by livestock at some point in time, and the cutting down of the preagricultural forest habitat caused disruption to the original plant and animal ecosystems.

Possibly 80 to 90 percent of Europe was once covered by forest. It stretched from the Mediterranean Sea to the Arctic Ocean. Although over half of Europe's original forests disappeared through the centuries of deforestation, Europe still has over one quarter of its land area as forest, such as the broadleaf and mixed forests, taiga of Scandinavia and Russia, mixed rainforests of the Caucasus and the Cork oak forests in the western Mediterranean. During recent times, deforestation has been slowed and many trees have been planted. However, in many cases monoculture plantations of conifers have replaced the original mixed natural forest, because these grow quicker. The plantations now cover vast areas of land, but offer poorer habitats for many European forest dwelling species which require a mixture
 of tree species and diverse forest structure. The amount of natural forest in Western Europe is just 2–3% or less, while in its Western Russia its 5–10%. The European country with the smallest percentage of forested area is Iceland (1%), while the most forested country is Finland (77%).
In temperate Europe, mixed forest with both broadleaf and coniferous trees dominate. The most important species in central and western Europe are beech and oak. In the north, the taiga is a mixed spruce–pine–birch forest; further north within Russia and extreme northern Scandinavia, the taiga gives way to tundra as the Arctic is approached. In the Mediterranean, many olive trees have been planted, which are very well adapted to its arid climate; Mediterranean Cypress is also widely planted in southern Europe. The semi-arid Mediterranean region hosts much scrub forest. A narrow east–west tongue of Eurasian grassland (the steppe) extends westwards from Ukraine and southern Russia and ends in Hungary and traverses into
 taiga to the north.


=== Fauna ===

Glaciation during the most recent ice age and the presence of humans affected the distribution of European fauna. As for the animals, in many parts of Europe most large animals and top predator species have been hunted to extinction. The woolly mammoth was extinct before the end of the Neolithic period. Today wolves (carnivores) and bears (omnivores) are endangered. Once they were found in most parts of Europe. However, deforestation and hunting caused these animals to withdraw further and further. By the Middle Ages the bears' habitats were limited to more or less inaccessible mountains with sufficient forest cover. Today, the brown bear lives primarily in the Balkan peninsula, Scandinavia and Russia; a small number also persist in other countries across Europe (Austria, Pyrenees etc.), but in these areas brown bear populations are fragmented and marginalised because of the destruction of their habitat. In addition, polar bears may be found on Svalbard, a Norwegian archi
pelago far north of Scandinavia. The wolf, the second-largest predator in Europe after the brown bear, can be found primarily in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Balkans, with a handful of packs in pockets of Western Europe (Scandinavia, Spain, etc.).

Other carnivores include the European wildcat, red fox and arctic fox, the golden jackal, different species of martens, the European hedgehog, different species of reptiles (like snakes such as vipers and grass snakes) and amphibians, as well as different birds (owls, hawks and other birds of prey).
Important European herbivores are snails, larvae, fish, different birds and mammals, like rodents, deer and roe deer, boars and living in the mountains, marmots, steinbocks, chamois among others. A number of insects, such as the small tortoiseshell butterfly, add to the biodiversity.
Sea creatures are also an important part of European flora and fauna. The sea flora is mainly phytoplankton. Important animals that live in European seas are zooplankton, molluscs,
 echinoderms, different crustaceans, squids and octopuses, fish, dolphins and whales.
Biodiversity is protected in Europe through the Council of Europe's Bern Convention, which has also been signed by the European Community as well as non-European states.


== Politics ==

The political map of Europe is substantially derived from the re-organisation of Europe following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. The prevalent form of government in Europe is parliamentary democracy, in most cases in the form of Republic; in 1815, the prevalent form of government was still the Monarchy. Europe's remaining eleven monarchies are constitutional.
European integration is the process of political, legal, economic (and in some cases social and cultural) integration of European states as it has been pursued by the powers sponsoring the Council of Europe since the end of the Second World War. The European Union has been the focus of economic integration on the continent since its foundation in 1993. More recently, the Eurasian Economi
c Union has been established as a counterpart comprising former Soviet states.
27 European states are members of the politico-economic European Union, 26 of the border-free Schengen Area and 20 of the monetary union Eurozone. Among the smaller European organisations are the Nordic Council, the Benelux, the Baltic Assembly and the Visegrád Group.

The least democratic countries in Europe are Belarus, Russia and Turkey in 2024 according to the V-Dem Democracy indices.


== List of states and territories ==

This list includes all internationally recognised sovereign countries falling even partially under any common geographical or political definitions of Europe.

Within the above-mentioned states are several de facto independent countries with limited to no international recognition. None of them are members of the UN:

Several dependencies and similar territories with broad autonomy are also found within or close to Europe. This includes Åland (an autonomous county of Finland), two autonomous territories of
 the Kingdom of Denmark (other than Denmark proper), three Crown Dependencies and two British Overseas Territories. Svalbard is also included due to its unique status within Norway, although it is not autonomous. Not included are the three countries of the United Kingdom with devolved powers and the two Autonomous Regions of Portugal, which despite having a unique degree of autonomy, are not largely self-governing in matters other than international affairs. Areas with little more than a unique tax status, such as the Canary Islands and Heligoland, are also not included for this reason.


== Economy ==

As a continent, the economy of Europe is currently the largest on Earth and it is the richest region as measured by assets under management with over $32.7 trillion compared to North America's $27.1 trillion in 2008. In 2009 Europe remained the wealthiest region. Its $37.1 trillion in assets under management represented one-third of the world's wealth. It was one of several regions where wealth surpassed its p
recrisis year-end peak. As with other continents, Europe has a large wealth gap among its countries. The richer states tend to be in the Northwest and West in general, followed by Central Europe, while most economies of Eastern and Southeastern Europe are still reemerging from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The model of the Blue Banana was designed as an economic geographic representation of the respective economic power of the regions, which was further developed into the Golden Banana or Blue Star. The trade between East and West, as well as towards Asia, which had been disrupted for a long time by the two world wars, new borders and the Cold War, increased sharply after 1989. In addition, there is new impetus from the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative across the Suez Canal towards Africa and Asia.
The European Union, a political entity composed of 27 European states, comprises the largest single economic area in the world. Nineteen EU countries share the euro as a common cur
rency.
Five European countries rank in the top ten of the world's largest national economies in GDP (PPP). This includes (ranks according to the CIA): Germany (6), Russia (7), the United Kingdom (10), France (11) and Italy (13).
Some European countries are much richer than others. The richest in terms of nominal GDP is Monaco with its US$185,829 per capita (2018) and the poorest is Ukraine with its US$3,659 per capita (2019).
As a whole, Europe's GDP per capita is US$21,767 according to a 2016 International Monetary Fund assessment.


=== Economic history ===
Industrial growth (1760–1945)
Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism. From Britain, it gradually spread throughout Europe. The Industrial Revolution started in Europe, specifically the United Kingdom in the late 18th century, and the 19th century saw Western Europe industrialise. Economies were disrupted by the First World War, but by the beginning of the Second World War, they had recovered and were having to comp
ete with the growing economic strength of the United States. The Second World War, again, damaged much of Europe's industries.

Cold War (1945–1991)

After the Second World War the economy of the UK was in a state of ruin, and continued to suffer relative economic decline in the following decades. Italy was also in a poor economic condition but regained a high level of growth by the 1950s. West Germany recovered quickly and had doubled production from pre-war levels by the 1950s. France also staged a remarkable comeback enjoying rapid growth and modernisation; later on Spain, under the leadership of Franco, also recovered and the nation recorded huge unprecedented economic growth beginning in the 1960s in what is called the Spanish miracle. The majority of Central and Eastern European states came under the control of the Soviet Union and thus were members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON).
The states which retained a free-market system were given a large amount of aid by the United Sta
tes under the Marshall Plan. The western states moved to link their economies together, providing the basis for the EU and increasing cross border trade. This helped them to enjoy rapidly improving economies, while those states in COMECON were struggling in a large part due to the cost of the Cold War. Until 1990, the European Community was expanded from 6 founding members to 12. The emphasis placed on resurrecting the West German economy led to it overtaking the UK as Europe's largest economy.

Reunification (1991–present)

With the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe in 1991, the post-socialist states underwent shock therapy measures to liberalise their economies and implement free market reforms.
After East and West Germany were reunited in 1990, the economy of West Germany struggled as it had to support and largely rebuild the infrastructure of East Germany, while the latter experienced sudden mass unemployment and plummeting of industrial production.
By the millennium change, the EU dominat
ed the economy of Europe, comprising the five largest European economies of the time: Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Spain. In 1999, 12 of the 15 members of the EU joined the Eurozone, replacing their national currencies by the euro.
Figures released by Eurostat in 2009 confirmed that the Eurozone had gone into recession in 2008. It impacted much of the region. In 2010, fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed concerning some countries in Europe, especially Greece, Ireland, Spain and Portugal. As a result, measures were taken, especially for Greece, by the leading countries of the Eurozone. The EU-27 unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2012. For those aged 15–24 it was 22.4%.


== Demographics ==

The population of Europe was about 742 million in 2023 according to UN estimates. This is slightly more than one ninth of the world's population. The population density of Europe (the number of people per area) is the second highest of any continent, behind Asia. The population of Europe is currently
 slowly decreasing, by about 0.2% per year, because there are fewer births than deaths. This natural decrease in population is reduced by the fact that more people migrate to Europe from other continents than vice versa.
Southern Europe and Western Europe are the regions with the highest average number of elderly people in the world. In 2021, the percentage of people over 65 years old was 21% in Western Europe and Southern Europe, compared to 19% in all of Europe and 10% in the world. Projections suggest that by 2050 Europe will reach 30%. This is caused by the fact that the population has been having children below replacement level since the 1970s. The United Nations predicts that Europe will decline its population between 2022 and 2050 by −7 per cent, without changing immigration movements.
According to a population projection of the UN Population Division, Europe's population may fall to between 680 and 720 million people by 2050, which would be 7% of the world population at that time. Within this conte
xt, significant disparities exist between regions in relation to fertility rates. The average number of children per female of child-bearing age is 1.52, far below the replacement rate. The UN predicts a steady population decline in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of emigration and low birth rates.


=== Ethnic groups ===

Pan and Pfeil (2004) count 87 distinct "peoples of Europe", of which 33 form the majority population in at least one sovereign state, while the remaining 54 constitute ethnic minorities.


=== Migration ===

Europe is home to the highest number of migrants of all global regions at nearly 87 million people in 2020, according to the International Organisation for Migration. In 2005, the EU had an overall net gain from immigration of 1.8 million people. This accounted for almost 85% of Europe's total population growth. In 2021, 827,000 persons were given citizenship of an EU member state, an increase of about 14% compared with 2020. 2.3 million immigrants from non-EU countries entered t
he EU in 2021.
Early modern emigration from Europe began with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century, and French and English settlers in the 17th century. But numbers remained relatively small until waves of mass emigration in the 19th century, when millions of poor families left Europe.
Today, large populations of European descent are found on every continent. European ancestry predominates in North America and to a lesser degree in South America (particularly in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Brazil, while most of the other Latin American countries also have a considerable population of European origins). Australia and New Zealand have large European-derived populations. Africa has no countries with European-derived majorities (or with the exception of Cape Verde and probably São Tomé and Príncipe, depending on context), but there are significant minorities, such as the White South Africans in South Africa. In Asia, European-derived populations, specifically Russians, predominate in North Asi
a and some parts of Northern Kazakhstan.


=== Languages ===

Europe has about 225 indigenous languages, mostly falling within three Indo-European language groups: the Romance languages, derived from the Latin of the Roman Empire; the Germanic languages, whose ancestor language came from southern Scandinavia; and the Slavic languages. Slavic languages are mostly spoken in Southern, Central and Eastern Europe. Romance languages are spoken primarily in Western and Southern Europe, as well as in Switzerland in Central Europe and Romania and Moldova in Eastern Europe. Germanic languages are spoken in Western, Northern and Central Europe as well as in Gibraltar and Malta in Southern Europe. Languages in adjacent areas show significant overlaps (such as in English, for example). Other Indo-European languages outside the three main groups include the Baltic group (Latvian and Lithuanian), the Celtic group (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish and Breton), Greek, Armenian and Albanian.
A distinct non-Indo-Eur
opean family of Uralic languages (Estonian, Finnish, Hungarian, Erzya, Komi, Mari, Moksha and Udmurt) is spoken mainly in Estonia, Finland, Hungary and parts of Russia. Turkic languages include Azerbaijani, Kazakh and Turkish, in addition to smaller languages in Eastern and Southeast Europe (Balkan Gagauz Turkish, Bashkir, Chuvash, Crimean Tatar, Karachay-Balkar, Kumyk, Nogai and Tatar). Kartvelian languages (Georgian, Mingrelian and Svan) are spoken primarily in Georgia. Two other language families reside in the North Caucasus (termed Northeast Caucasian, most notably including Chechen, Avar and Lezgin; and Northwest Caucasian, most notably including Adyghe). Maltese is the only Semitic language that is official within the EU, while Basque is the only European language isolate.
Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Europe today. The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's Eur
opean Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.


=== Religion ===

The largest religion in Europe is Christianity, with 76.2% of Europeans considering themselves Christians, including Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and various Protestant denominations. Among Protestants, the most popular are Lutheranism, Anglicanism and the Reformed faith. Smaller Protestant denominations include Anabaptists as well as denominations centered in the United States such as Pentecostalism, Methodism, and Evangelicalism. Although Christianity originated in the Middle East, its centre of mass shifted to Europe when it became the official religion of the Roman Empire in the late 4th century. Christianity played a prominent role in the development of the European culture and identity. Today, a bit over 25% of the world's Christians live in Europe.
Islam is the second most popular religion in Europe. Over 25 million, or roughly 5% of the population, adhere to it. In Albania and Bos
nia and Herzegovina, two countries in the Balkan peninsula in Southeastern Europe, Islam instead of Christianity is the majority religion. This is also the case in Turkey and in certain parts of Russia, as well as in Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, all of which are at the border to Asia. Many countries in Europe are home to a sizeable Muslim minority, and immigration to Europe has increased the number of Muslim people in Europe in recent years.
The Jewish population in Europe was about 1.4 million people in 2020 (about 0.2% of the population). There is a long history of Jewish life in Europe, beginning in antiquity. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Russian Empire had the majority of the world's Jews living within its borders. In 1897, according to Russian census of 1897, the total Jewish population of Russia was 5.1 million people, which was 4.13% of total population. Of this total, the vast majority lived within the Pale of Settlement. In 1933, there were about 9.5 million Jewish people in Europ
e, representing 1.7% of the population, but most were killed, and most of the rest displaced, during The Holocaust. In the 21st century, France has the largest Jewish population in Europe, followed by the United Kingdom, Germany and Russia.
Other religions practiced in Europe include Hinduism and Buddhism, which are minority religions, except in Russia's Republic of Kalmykia, where Tibetan Buddhism is the majority religion.
A large and increasing number of people in Europe are irreligious, atheist and agnostic. They are estimated to make up about 18.3% of Europe's population currently.


=== Major cities and urban areas ===

The three largest urban areas of Europe are Moscow, London and Paris. All have over 10 million residents, and as such have been described as megacities. While Istanbul has the highest total city population, it lies partly in Asia. 64.9% of the residents live on the European side and 35.1% on the Asian side.
The next largest cities in order of population are Madrid, Saint Petersburg, Milan
, Barcelona, Berlin, and Rome each having over three million residents.
When considering the commuter belts or metropolitan areas within Europe (for which comparable data is available), Moscow covers the largest population, followed in order by Istanbul, London, Paris, Madrid, Milan, Ruhr Area, Saint Petersburg, Rhein-Süd, Barcelona and Berlin.


== Culture ==

"Europe" as a cultural concept is substantially derived from the shared heritage of ancient Greece and the Roman Empire and its cultures. The boundaries of Europe were historically understood as those of Christendom (or more specifically Latin Christendom), as established or defended throughout the medieval and early modern history of Europe, especially against Islam, as in the Reconquista and the Ottoman wars in Europe.
This shared cultural heritage is combined by overlapping indigenous national cultures and folklores, roughly divided into Slavic, Latin (Romance) and Germanic, but with several components not part of either of these groups (notably Gr
eek, Basque and Celtic). Historically, special examples with overlapping cultures are Strasbourg with Latin (Romance) and Germanic, or Trieste with Latin, Slavic and Germanic roots.
Cultural contacts and mixtures shape a large part of the regional cultures of Europe. Europe is often described as "maximum cultural diversity with minimal geographical distances".
Different cultural events are organised in Europe, with the aim of bringing different cultures closer together and raising awareness of their importance, such as the European Capital of Culture, the European Region of Gastronomy, the European Youth Capital and the European Capital of Sport.


=== Sport ===


=== Social dimension ===
In Europe many people are unable to access basic social conditions, which makes it harder for them to thrive and flourish. Access to basic necessities can be compromised, for example 10% of Europeans spend at least 40% of household income on housing. 75 million Europeans feel socially isolated. From the 1980s income inequali
ty has been rising and wage shares have been falling. In 2016, the richest 20% of households earned over five times more than the poorest 20%. Many workers experience stagnant real wages and precarious work is common even for essential workers.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
National Geographic Society (2005). National Geographic Visual History of the World. Washington, DC: National Geographic Society. ISBN 0-7922-3695-5.
Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2011). The Earth and Its Peoples, Brief Edition. Vol. 1. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-91311-5.
Brown, Stephen F.; Anatolios, Khaled; Palmer, Martin (2009). O'Brien, Joanne (ed.). Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60413-106-2.
Laiou, Angeliki E.; Morisson, Cécile (2007). The Byzantine Economy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84978-4.
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären (1997). The Myth of Continents: A Criti
que of Metageography. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1.
Pounds, Norman John Greville (1979). An Historical Geography of Europe, 1500–1840. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22379-9.


== External links ==
Europe web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries
Europe at the Encyclopædia Britannica
Europe: Human Geography at the National Geographic Society
Europe at Curlie
European Reading Room from the United States Library of Congress
"Europe" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 9 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 907–953.
The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online Columbia University Press
Historical Maps

Borders in Europe 3000BC to the present Geacron Historical atlas
Online history of Europe in 21 maps

===Title===
Europe

===Content===
Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere. It is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and Asia to the east. Europe shares the landmass of Eurasia with Asia, and of Afro-Eurasia with both Asia and Africa. Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea, and the waterway of the Bosporus Strait.
Europe covers about 10.18 million km2 (3.93 million sq mi), or 2% of Earth's surface (6.8% of land area), making it the second-smallest continent (using the seven-continent model). Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states, of which Russia is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population. Europe had a total population of about 745 million (about 10% of the world popu
lation) in 2021; the third-largest after Asia and Africa. The European climate is affected by warm Atlantic currents, such as the Gulf Stream, which produce a temperate climate, tempering winters and summers, on much of the continent. Further from the sea, seasonal differences are more noticeable producing more continental climates.
European culture consists of a range of national and regional cultures, which form the central roots of the wider Western civilisation, and together commonly reference ancient Greece and ancient Rome, particularly through their Christian successors, as crucial and shared roots. Beginning with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE, Christian consolidation of Europe in the wake of the Migration Period marked the European post-classical Middle Ages. The Italian Renaissance, radiating from Florence, spread to the rest of the continent a new humanist interest in art and science which led to the modern era. Since the Age of Discovery, led by Spain and Portugal, Europe played a 
predominant role in global affairs with multiple explorations and conquests around the world.
Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers colonised at various times the Americas, almost all of Africa and Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
The Age of Enlightenment, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic Wars shaped the continent culturally, politically and economically from the end of the 17th century until the first half of the 19th century. The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural and social change in Western Europe and eventually the wider world. Both world wars began and were fought to a great extent in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence and competed over dominance in Europe and globally. The resulting Cold War divided Europe along the Iron Curtain, with NATO in the West and the Wars
aw Pact in the East. This divide ended with the Revolutions of 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which allowed European integration to advance significantly.
European integration is being advanced institutionally since 1948 with the founding of the Council of Europe, and significantly through the realisation of the European Union (EU), which represents today the majority of Europe. The European Union is a supranational political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation and is based on a system of European treaties. The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. A majority of its members have adopted a common currency, the euro, and participate in the European single market and a customs union. A large bloc of countries, the Schengen Area, have also abolished internal border and immigration controls. Regular popular elections take place every five years within the EU; they are cons
idered to be the second-largest democratic elections in the world after India's. The EU is the third-largest economy in the world.


== Name ==

The place name Evros was first used by the ancient Greeks to refer to their northernmost province, which bears the same name today. The principal river there – Evros (today's Maritsa) – flows through the fertile valleys of Thrace, which it self was also called Europe, before the term meant the continent.
In classical Greek mythology, Europa (Ancient Greek: Εὐρώπη, Eurṓpē) was a Phoenician princess. One view is that her name derives from the Ancient Greek elements εὐρύς (eurús) 'wide, broad', and ὤψ (ōps, gen. ὠπός, ōpós) 'eye, face, countenance', hence their composite Eurṓpē would mean 'wide-gazing' or 'broad of aspect'. Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it. An alternative view is that of Robert Beekes, who has argued in favour of a pre-Indo-Europea
n origin for the name, explaining that a derivation from eurus would yield a different toponym than Europa. Beekes has located toponyms related to that of Europa in the territory of ancient Greece, and localities such as that of Europos in ancient Macedonia.
There have been attempts to connect Eurṓpē to a Semitic term for west, this being either Akkadian erebu meaning 'to go down, set' (said of the sun) or Phoenician 'ereb 'evening, west', which is at the origin of Arabic maghreb and Hebrew ma'arav. Martin Litchfield West stated that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor", while Beekes considers a connection to Semitic languages improbable.
Most major world languages use words derived from Eurṓpē or Europa to refer to the continent. Chinese, for example, uses the word Ōuzhōu (歐洲/欧洲), which is an abbreviation of the transliterated name Ōuluóbā zhōu (歐羅巴洲) (zhōu means "continent"); a similar Chinese-derived term Ōshū (欧州
) is also sometimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, Ōshū Rengō (欧州連合), despite the katakana Yōroppa (ヨーロッパ) being more commonly used. In some Turkic languages, the originally Persian name Frangistan ("land of the Franks") is used casually in referring to much of Europe, besides official names such as Avrupa or Evropa.


== Definition ==


=== Contemporary definition ===

The prevalent definition of Europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid-19th century.
Europe is taken to be bounded by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the east and north-east are usually taken to be the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the south-east, the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea, and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.

Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenl
and is usually assigned to North America, although politically belonging to Denmark. Nevertheless, there are some exceptions based on sociopolitical and cultural differences. Cyprus is closest to Anatolia (or Asia Minor), but is considered part of Europe politically and it is a member state of the EU. Malta was considered an island of North-western Africa for centuries, but now it is considered to be part of Europe as well. "Europe", as used specifically in British English, may also refer to Continental Europe exclusively.
The term "continent" usually implies the physical geography of a large land mass completely or almost completely surrounded by water at its borders. Prior to the adoption of the current convention that includes mountain divides, the border between Europe and Asia had been redefined several times since its first conception in classical antiquity, but always as a series of rivers, seas and straits that were believed to extend an unknown distance east and north from the Mediterranean Sea witho
ut the inclusion of any mountain ranges. Cartographer Herman Moll suggested in 1715 Europe was bounded by a series of partly-joined waterways directed towards the Turkish straits, and the Irtysh River draining into the upper part of the Ob River and the Arctic Ocean. In contrast, the present eastern boundary of Europe partially adheres to the Ural and Caucasus Mountains, which is somewhat arbitrary and inconsistent compared to any clear-cut definition of the term "continent".
The current division of Eurasia into two continents now reflects East-West cultural, linguistic and ethnic differences which vary on a spectrum rather than with a sharp dividing line. The geographic border between Europe and Asia does not follow any state boundaries and now only follows a few bodies of water. Turkey is generally considered a transcontinental country divided entirely by water, while Russia and Kazakhstan are only partly divided by waterways. France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain are also transcontinental (or more pr
operly, intercontinental, when oceans or large seas are involved) in that their main land areas are in Europe while pockets of their territories are located on other continents separated from Europe by large bodies of water. Spain, for example, has territories south of the Mediterranean Sea—namely, Ceuta and Melilla—which are parts of Africa and share a border with Morocco. According to the current convention, Georgia and Azerbaijan are transcontinental countries where waterways have been completely replaced by mountains as the divide between continents.


=== History of the concept ===


==== Early history ====

The first recorded usage of Eurṓpē as a geographic term is in the Homeric Hymn to Delian Apollo, in reference to the western shore of the Aegean Sea. As a name for a part of the known world, it is first used in the 6th century BCE by Anaximander and Hecataeus. Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni River on the territory of Georgia) in 
the Caucasus, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BCE. Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts—Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa)—with the Nile and the Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia. Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don. The Book of Jubilees described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from Northwest Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.
The convention received by the Middle Ages and surviving into modern usage is that of the Roman era used by Roman-era authors such as Posidonius, Strabo and Ptolemy, who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
The Roman Empire did not attach a strong identity to the concep
t of continental divisions. However, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of "Europe". The term "Europe" is first used for a cultural sphere in the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century. From that time, the term designated the sphere of influence of the Western Church, as opposed to both the Eastern Orthodox churches and to the Islamic world.
A cultural definition of Europe as the lands of Latin Christendom coalesced in the 8th century, signifying the new cultural condominium created through the confluence of Germanic traditions and Christian-Latin culture, defined partly in contrast with Byzantium and Islam, and limited to northern Iberia, the British Isles, France, Christianised western Germany, the Alpine regions and northern and central Italy. The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: Europa often figures in the letters of Charlemagne
's court scholar, Alcuin. The transition of Europe to being a cultural term as well as a geographic one led to the borders of Europe being affected by cultural considerations in the East, especially relating to areas under Byzantine, Ottoman, and Russian influence. Such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term Europe by its users. Such cultural considerations were not applied to the Americas, despite their conquest and settlement by European states. Instead, the concept of "Western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together Europe and these colonies.


==== Modern definitions ====

The question of defining a precise eastern boundary of Europe arises in the Early Modern period, as the eastern extension of Muscovy began to include North Asia. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the 18th century, the traditional division of the landmass of Eurasia into two continents, Europe and Asia, followed Ptolemy, with the boundary following the Turkish Straits, the Black Sea, t
he Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and the Don (ancient Tanais). But maps produced during the 16th to 18th centuries tended to differ in how to continue the boundary beyond the Don bend at Kalach-na-Donu (where it is closest to the Volga, now joined with it by the Volga–Don Canal), into territory not described in any detail by the ancient geographers.
Around 1715, Herman Moll produced a map showing the northern part of the Ob River and the Irtysh River, a major tributary of the Ob, as components of a series of partly-joined waterways taking the boundary between Europe and Asia from the Turkish Straits, and the Don River all the way to the Arctic Ocean. In 1721, he produced a more up to date map that was easier to read. However, his proposal to adhere to major rivers as the line of demarcation was never taken up by other geographers who were beginning to move away from the idea of water boundaries as the only legitimate divides between Europe and Asia.
Four years later, in 1725, Philip Johan von Strahlenberg w
as the first to depart from the classical Don boundary. He drew a new line along the Volga, following the Volga north until the Samara Bend, along Obshchy Syrt (the drainage divide between the Volga and Ural Rivers), then north and east along the latter waterway to its source in the Ural Mountains. At this point he proposed that mountain ranges could be included as boundaries between continents as alternatives to nearby waterways. Accordingly, he drew the new boundary north along Ural Mountains rather than the nearby and parallel running Ob and Irtysh rivers. This was endorsed by the Russian Empire and introduced the convention that would eventually become commonly accepted. However, this did not come without criticism. Voltaire, writing in 1760 about Peter the Great's efforts to make Russia more European, ignored the whole boundary question with his claim that neither Russia, Scandinavia, northern Germany, nor Poland were fully part of Europe. Since then, many modern analytical geographers like Halford Macki
nder have declared that they see little validity in the Ural Mountains as a boundary between continents.
The mapmakers continued to differ on the boundary between the lower Don and Samara well into the 19th century. The 1745 atlas published by the Russian Academy of Sciences has the boundary follow the Don beyond Kalach as far as Serafimovich before cutting north towards Arkhangelsk, while other 18th- to 19th-century mapmakers such as John Cary followed Strahlenberg's prescription. To the south, the Kuma–Manych Depression was identified c. 1773 by a German naturalist, Peter Simon Pallas, as a valley that once connected the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, and subsequently was proposed as a natural boundary between continents.
By the mid-19th century, there were three main conventions, one following the Don, the Volga–Don Canal and the Volga, the other following the Kuma–Manych Depression to the Caspian and then the Ural River, and the third abandoning the Don altogether, following the Greater Caucasus w
atershed to the Caspian. The question was still treated as a "controversy" in geographical literature of the 1860s, with Douglas Freshfield advocating the Caucasus crest boundary as the "best possible", citing support from various "modern geographers".
In Russia and the Soviet Union, the boundary along the Kuma–Manych Depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906. In 1958, the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay, on the Kara Sea, along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains, then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills, and then the Emba River; and Kuma–Manych Depression, thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe. The Flora Europaea adopted a boundary along the Terek and Kuban rivers, so southwards from the Kuma and the Manych, but still with the Caucasus entirely in Asia. However, most geographers in the Soviet Union favoured the boundary along the Cauc
asus crest, and this became the common convention in the later 20th century, although the Kuma–Manych boundary remained in use in some 20th-century maps.
Some view the separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country. [...]."


== History ==


=== Prehistory ===

During the 2.5 million years of the Pleistocene, numerous cold phases called glacials (Quaternary ice age), or significant advances of continental ice sheets, in Europe and North America, occurred at intervals of approximately 40,000 to 100,000 years. The long glacial periods were separated by more temperate and shorter interglacials which lasted about 10,000–15,000 years. The last cold episode of the last glacial period ended about 10,000 years ago. Earth is currently in an interglacial period of the Quaternary, called the Holocene.
Homo erectus georgicus, which lived roughly 1.
8 million years ago in Georgia, is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in Europe. Other hominin remains, dating back roughly 1 million years, have been discovered in Atapuerca, Spain. Neanderthal man (named after the Neandertal valley in Germany) appeared in Europe 150,000 years ago (115,000 years ago it is found already in the territory of present-day Poland) and disappeared from the fossil record about 40,000 years ago, with their final refuge being the Iberian Peninsula. The Neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans (Cro-Magnons), who appeared in Europe around 43,000 to 40,000 years ago. Homo sapiens arrived in Europe around 54,000 years ago, some 10,000 years earlier than previously thought. The earliest sites in Europe dated 48,000 years ago are Riparo Mochi (Italy), Geissenklösterle (Germany) and Isturitz (France).
The European Neolithic period—marked by the cultivation of crops and the raising of livestock, increased numbers of settlements and the widespread use of pottery—began aroun
d 7000 BCE in Greece and the Balkans, probably influenced by earlier farming practices in Anatolia and the Near East. It spread from the Balkans along the valleys of the Danube and the Rhine (Linear Pottery culture), and along the Mediterranean coast (Cardial culture). Between 4500 and 3000 BCE, these central European neolithic cultures developed further to the west and the north, transmitting newly acquired skills in producing copper artifacts. In Western Europe the Neolithic period was characterised not by large agricultural settlements but by field monuments, such as causewayed enclosures, burial mounds and megalithic tombs. The Corded Ware cultural horizon flourished at the transition from the Neolithic to the Chalcolithic. During this period giant megalithic monuments, such as the Megalithic Temples of Malta and Stonehenge, were constructed throughout Western and Southern Europe.
The modern native populations of Europe largely descend from three distinct lineages: Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, descended f
rom populations associated with the Paleolithic Epigravettian culture; Neolithic Early European Farmers who migrated from Anatolia during the Neolithic Revolution 9,000 years ago; and Yamnaya Steppe herders who expanded into Europe from the Pontic–Caspian steppe of Ukraine and southern Russia in the context of Indo-European migrations 5,000 years ago. The European Bronze Age began c. 3200 BCE in Greece with the Minoan civilisation on Crete, the first advanced civilisation in Europe. The Minoans were followed by the Myceneans, who collapsed suddenly around 1200 BCE, ushering the European Iron Age. Iron Age colonisation by the Greeks and Phoenicians gave rise to early Mediterranean cities. Early Iron Age Italy and Greece from around the 8th century BCE gradually gave rise to historical Classical antiquity, whose beginning is sometimes dated to 776 BCE, the year of the first Olympic Games.


=== Classical antiquity ===

Ancient Greece was the founding culture of Western civilisation. Western democratic and rat
ionalist culture are often attributed to Ancient Greece. The Greek city-state, the polis, was the fundamental political unit of classical Greece. In 508 BCE, Cleisthenes instituted the world's first democratic system of government in Athens. The Greek political ideals were rediscovered in the late 18th century by European philosophers and idealists. Greece also generated many cultural contributions: in philosophy, humanism and rationalism under Aristotle, Socrates and Plato; in history with Herodotus and Thucydides; in dramatic and narrative verse, starting with the epic poems of Homer; in drama with Sophocles and Euripides; in medicine with Hippocrates and Galen; and in science with Pythagoras, Euclid and Archimedes. In the course of the 5th century BCE, several of the Greek city states would ultimately check the Achaemenid Persian advance in Europe through the Greco-Persian Wars, considered a pivotal moment in world history, as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as Golden Age of Athens, the semin
al period of ancient Greece that laid many of the foundations of Western civilisation.

Greece was followed by Rome, which left its mark on law, politics, language, engineering, architecture, government and many more key aspects in western civilisation. By 200 BCE, Rome had conquered Italy and over the following two centuries it conquered Greece and Hispania (Spain and Portugal), the North African coast, much of the Middle East, Gaul (France and Belgium) and Britannia (England and Wales).
Expanding from their base in central Italy beginning in the third century BCE, the Romans gradually expanded to eventually rule the entire Mediterranean Basin and Western Europe by the turn of the millennium. The Roman Republic ended in 27 BCE, when Augustus proclaimed the Roman Empire. The two centuries that followed are known as the pax romana, a period of unprecedented peace, prosperity and political stability in most of Europe. The empire continued to expand under emperors such as Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, who 
spent time on the Empire's northern border fighting Germanic, Pictish and Scottish tribes. Christianity was legalised by Constantine I in 313 CE after three centuries of imperial persecution. Constantine also permanently moved the capital of the empire from Rome to the city of Byzantium (modern-day Istanbul) which was renamed Constantinople in his honour in 330 CE. Christianity became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 CE and in 391–392 CE, the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions. This is sometimes considered to mark the end of antiquity; alternatively antiquity is considered to end with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE; the closure of the pagan Platonic Academy of Athens in 529 CE; or the rise of Islam in the early 7th century CE. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe.


=== Early Middle Ages ===

During the decline of the Roman Empire, Europe entered a long period of change arisin
g from what historians call the "Age of Migrations". There were numerous invasions and migrations amongst the Ostrogoths, Visigoths, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, Angles, Saxons, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars and, later on, the Vikings, Pechenegs, Cumans and Magyars. Renaissance thinkers such as Petrarch would later refer to this as the "Dark Ages".
Isolated monastic communities were the only places to safeguard and compile written knowledge accumulated previously; apart from this very few written records survive and much literature, philosophy, mathematics and other thinking from the classical period disappeared from Western Europe, though they were preserved in the east, in the Byzantine Empire.
While the Roman empire in the west continued to decline, Roman traditions and the Roman state remained strong in the predominantly Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was the most powerful economic, cultural and military force in Europe.
 Emperor Justinian I presided over Constantinople's first golden age: he established a legal code that forms the basis of many modern legal systems, funded the construction of the Hagia Sophia and brought the Christian church under state control.
From the 7th century onwards, as the Byzantines and neighbouring Sasanid Persians were severely weakened due to the protracted, centuries-lasting and frequent Byzantine–Sasanian wars, the Muslim Arabs began to make inroads into historically Roman territory, taking the Levant and North Africa and making inroads into Asia Minor. In the mid-7th century, following the Muslim conquest of Persia, Islam penetrated into the Caucasus region. Over the next centuries Muslim forces took Cyprus, Malta, Crete, Sicily and parts of southern Italy. Between 711 and 720, most of the lands of the Visigothic Kingdom of Iberia was brought under Muslim rule—save for small areas in the north-west (Asturias) and largely Basque regions in the Pyrenees. This territory, under the Arabic nam
e Al-Andalus, became part of the expanding Umayyad Caliphate. The unsuccessful second siege of Constantinople (717) weakened the Umayyad dynasty and reduced their prestige. The Umayyads were then defeated by the Frankish leader Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers in 732, which ended their northward advance. In the remote regions of north-western Iberia and the middle Pyrenees the power of the Muslims in the south was scarcely felt. It was here that the foundations of the Christian kingdoms of Asturias, Leon and Galicia were laid and from where the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula would start. However, no coordinated attempt would be made to drive the Moors out. The Christian kingdoms were mainly focused on their own internal power struggles. As a result, the Reconquista took the greater part of eight hundred years, in which period a long list of Alfonsos, Sanchos, Ordoños, Ramiros, Fernandos and Bermudos would be fighting their Christian rivals as much as the Muslim invaders.

During the Dark Ages, t
he Western Roman Empire fell under the control of various tribes. The Germanic and Slav tribes established their domains over Western and Eastern Europe, respectively. Eventually the Frankish tribes were united under Clovis I. Charlemagne, a Frankish king of the Carolingian dynasty who had conquered most of Western Europe, was anointed "Holy Roman Emperor" by the Pope in 800. This led in 962 to the founding of the Holy Roman Empire, which eventually became centred in the German principalities of central Europe.
East Central Europe saw the creation of the first Slavic states and the adoption of Christianity (c. 1000 CE). The powerful West Slavic state of Great Moravia spread its territory all the way south to the Balkans, reaching its largest territorial extent under Svatopluk I and causing a series of armed conflicts with East Francia. Further south, the first South Slavic states emerged in the late 7th and 8th century and adopted Christianity: the First Bulgarian Empire, the Serbian Principality (later Kingd
om and Empire) and the Duchy of Croatia (later Kingdom of Croatia). To the East, Kievan Rus' expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century. In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the religion of state. Further East, Volga Bulgaria became an Islamic state in the 10th century, but was eventually absorbed into Russia several centuries later.


=== High and Late Middle Ages ===

The period between the year 1000 and 1250 is known as the High Middle Ages, followed by the Late Middle Ages until c. 1500.
During the High Middle Ages the population of Europe experienced significant growth, culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century. Economic growth, together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes, made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas. The growing wealth and independence acquired by some coastal cities gave the Maritime Republics a leading role in the Europea
n scene.
The Middle Ages on the mainland were dominated by the two upper echelons of the social structure: the nobility and the clergy. Feudalism developed in France in the Early Middle Ages, and soon spread throughout Europe. A struggle for influence between the nobility and the monarchy in England led to the writing of Magna Carta and the establishment of a parliament. The primary source of culture in this period came from the Roman Catholic Church. Through monasteries and cathedral schools, the Church was responsible for education in much of Europe.

The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages. An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously, with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire. In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land. In Europe itself, the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics. In the Iberian Peninsula, t
he Reconquista concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492, ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the south-western peninsula.
In the east, a resurgent Byzantine Empire recaptured Crete and Cyprus from the Muslims, and reconquered the Balkans. Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe from the 9th to the 12th centuries, with a population of approximately 400,000. The Empire was weakened following the defeat at Manzikert, and was weakened considerably by the sack of Constantinople in 1204, during the Fourth Crusade. Although it would recover Constantinople in 1261, Byzantium fell in 1453 when Constantinople was taken by the Ottoman Empire.

In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Pechenegs and the Cuman-Kipchaks, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, and temporarily halted the expansion of the Rus' state to the south and east. Like many other parts of Eurasia, these terri
tories were overrun by the Mongols. The invaders, who became known as Tatars, were mostly Turkic-speaking peoples under Mongol suzerainty. They established the state of the Golden Horde with headquarters in Crimea, which later adopted Islam as a religion, and ruled over modern-day southern and central Russia for more than three centuries. After the collapse of Mongol dominions, the first Romanian states (principalities) emerged in the 14th century: Moldavia and Walachia. Previously, these territories were under the successive control of Pechenegs and Cumans. From the 12th to the 15th centuries, the Grand Duchy of Moscow grew from a small principality under Mongol rule to the largest state in Europe, overthrowing the Mongols in 1480, and eventually becoming the Tsardom of Russia. The state was consolidated under Ivan III the Great and Ivan the Terrible, steadily expanding to the east and south over the next centuries.
The Great Famine of 1315–1317 was the first crisis that would strike Europe in the late Mid
dle Ages. The period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss. The population of France was reduced by half. Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines, and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period. Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death, one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe alone—a third of the European population at the time.
The plague had a devastating effect on Europe's social structure; it induced people to live for the moment as illustrated by Giovanni Boccaccio in The Decameron (1353). It was a serious blow to the Roman Catholic Church and led to increased persecution of Jews, beggars and lepers. The plague is thought to have returned every generation with varying virulence and mortalities until the 18th century. During this period, more than 100 plague epidemics swept across Europe.


=== Early modern period ===

The Renaissance was a period of cultural change originating in F
lorence, and later spreading to the rest of Europe. The rise of a new humanism was accompanied by the recovery of forgotten classical Greek and Arabic knowledge from monastic libraries, often translated from Arabic into Latin. The Renaissance spread across Europe between the 14th and 16th centuries: it saw the flowering of art, philosophy, music, and the sciences, under the joint patronage of royalty, the nobility, the Roman Catholic Church and an emerging merchant class. Patrons in Italy, including the Medici family of Florentine bankers and the Popes in Rome, funded prolific quattrocento and cinquecento artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci.
Political intrigue within the Church in the mid-14th century caused the Western Schism. During this forty-year period, two popes—one in Avignon and one in Rome—claimed rulership over the Church. Although the schism was eventually healed in 1417, the papacy's spiritual authority had suffered greatly. In the 15th century, Europe started to extend
 itself beyond its geographic frontiers. Spain and Portugal, the greatest naval powers of the time, took the lead in exploring the world. Exploration reached the Southern Hemisphere in the Atlantic and the southern tip of Africa. Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492, and Vasco da Gama opened the ocean route to the East linking the Atlantic and Indian Oceans in 1498. The Portuguese-born explorer Ferdinand Magellan reached Asia westward across the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans in a Spanish expedition, resulting in the first circumnavigation of the globe, completed by the Spaniard Juan Sebastián Elcano (1519–1522). Soon after, the Spanish and Portuguese began establishing large global empires in the Americas, Asia, Africa and Oceania. France, the Netherlands and England soon followed in building large colonial empires with vast holdings in Africa, the Americas and Asia. In 1588, a Spanish armada failed to invade England. A year later England tried unsuccessfully to invade Spain, allowing Phili
p II of Spain to maintain his dominant war capacity in Europe. This English disaster also allowed the Spanish fleet to retain its capability to wage war for the next decades. However, two more Spanish armadas failed to invade England (2nd Spanish Armada and 3rd Spanish Armada).

The Church's power was further weakened by the Protestant Reformation in 1517 when German theologian Martin Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses criticising the selling of indulgences to the church door. He was subsequently excommunicated in the papal bull Exsurge Domine in 1520 and his followers were condemned in the 1521 Diet of Worms, which divided German princes between Protestant and Roman Catholic faiths. Religious fighting and warfare spread with Protestantism. The plunder of the empires of the Americas allowed Spain to finance religious persecution in Europe for over a century. The Thirty Years War (1618–1648) crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population. 
In the aftermath of the Peace of Westphalia, France rose to predominance within Europe. The defeat of the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Vienna in 1683 marked the historic end of Ottoman expansion into Europe.
The 17th century in Central and parts of Eastern Europe was a period of general decline; the region experienced more than 150 famines in a 200-year period between 1501 and 1700. From the Union of Krewo (1385) east-central Europe was dominated by the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The hegemony of the vast Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had ended with the devastation brought by the Second Northern War (Deluge) and subsequent conflicts; the state itself was partitioned and ceased to exist at the end of the 18th century.
From the 15th to 18th centuries, when the disintegrating khanates of the Golden Horde were conquered by Russia, Tatars from the Crimean Khanate frequently raided Eastern Slavic lands to capture slaves. Further east, the Nogai Horde and Kazakh Khanate frequently raided
 the Slavic-speaking areas of contemporary Russia and Ukraine for hundreds of years, until the Russian expansion and conquest of most of northern Eurasia (i.e. Eastern Europe, Central Asia and Siberia).
The Renaissance and the New Monarchs marked the start of an Age of Discovery, a period of exploration, invention and scientific development. Among the great figures of the Western scientific revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries were Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Isaac Newton. According to Peter Barrett, "It is widely accepted that 'modern science' arose in the Europe of the 17th century (towards the end of the Renaissance), introducing a new understanding of the natural world."


=== 18th and 19th centuries ===

The Seven Years' War brought to an end the "Old System" of alliances in Europe. Consequently, when the American Revolutionary War turned into a global war between 1778 and 1783, Britain found itself opposed by a strong coalition of European powers, and lacking any substantial ally.
The Age of En
lightenment was a powerful intellectual movement during the 18th century promoting scientific and reason-based thoughts. Discontent with the aristocracy and clergy's monopoly on political power in France resulted in the French Revolution, and the establishment of the First Republic as a result of which the monarchy and many of the nobility perished during the initial reign of terror. Napoleon Bonaparte rose to power in the aftermath of the French Revolution, and established the First French Empire that, during the Napoleonic Wars, grew to encompass large parts of Europe before collapsing in 1815 with the Battle of Waterloo. Napoleonic rule resulted in the further dissemination of the ideals of the French Revolution, including that of the nation state, as well as the widespread adoption of the French models of administration, law and education. The Congress of Vienna, convened after Napoleon's downfall, established a new balance of power in Europe centred on the five "Great Powers": the UK, France, Prussia, Au
stria and Russia. This balance would remain in place until the Revolutions of 1848, during which liberal uprisings affected all of Europe except for Russia and the UK. These revolutions were eventually put down by conservative elements and few reforms resulted. The year 1859 saw the unification of Romania, as a nation state, from smaller principalities. In 1867, the Austro-Hungarian empire was formed; 1871 saw the unifications of both Italy and Germany as nation-states from smaller principalities.
In parallel, the Eastern Question grew more complex ever since the Ottoman defeat in the Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774). As the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire seemed imminent, the Great Powers struggled to safeguard their strategic and commercial interests in the Ottoman domains. The Russian Empire stood to benefit from the decline, whereas the Habsburg Empire and Britain perceived the preservation of the Ottoman Empire to be in their best interests. Meanwhile, the Serbian Revolution (1804) and Greek War of Inde
pendence (1821) marked the beginning of the end of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, which ended with the Balkan Wars in 1912–1913. Formal recognition of the de facto independent principalities of Montenegro, Serbia and Romania ensued at the Congress of Berlin in 1878.

The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout Europe. The invention and implementation of new technologies resulted in rapid urban growth, mass employment and the rise of a new working class. Reforms in social and economic spheres followed, including the first laws on child labour, the legalisation of trade unions, and the abolition of slavery. In Britain, the Public Health Act of 1875 was passed, which significantly improved living conditions in many British cities. Europe's population increased from about 100 million in 1700 to 400 million by 1900. The last major famine recorded in Western Europe, the Great Famine of Ireland, caused death and mass emigration of millions of Irish pe
ople. In the 19th century, 70 million people left Europe in migrations to various European colonies abroad and to the United States. The industrial revolution also led to large population growth, and the share of the world population living in Europe reached a peak of slightly above 25% around the year 1913.


=== 20th century to the present ===

Two world wars and an economic depression dominated the first half of the 20th century. The First World War was fought between 1914 and 1918. It started when Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated by the Yugoslav nationalist Gavrilo Princip. Most European nations were drawn into the war, which was fought between the Entente Powers (France, Belgium, Serbia, Portugal, Russia, the United Kingdom, and later Italy, Greece, Romania, and the United States) and the Central Powers (Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire). The war left more than 16 million civilians and military dead. Over 60 million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 
to 1918.

Russia was plunged into the Russian Revolution, which threw down the Tsarist monarchy and replaced it with the communist Soviet Union, leading also to the independence of many former Russian governorates, such as Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as new European countries. Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire collapsed and broke up into separate nations, and many other nations had their borders redrawn. The Treaty of Versailles, which officially ended the First World War in 1919, was harsh towards Germany, upon whom it placed full responsibility for the war and imposed heavy sanctions. Excess deaths in Russia over the course of the First World War and the Russian Civil War (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined total of 18 million. In 1932–1933, under Stalin's leadership, confiscations of grain by the Soviet authorities contributed to the second Soviet famine which caused millions of deaths; surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour. Stalin
 was also responsible for the Great Purge of 1937–38 in which the NKVD executed 681,692 people; millions of people were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.

The social revolutions sweeping through Russia also affected other European nations following The Great War: in 1919, with the Weimar Republic in Germany and the First Austrian Republic; in 1922, with Mussolini's one-party fascist government in the Kingdom of Italy and in Atatürk's Turkish Republic, adopting the Western alphabet and state secularism.
Economic instability, caused in part by debts incurred in the First World War and 'loans' to Germany played havoc in Europe in the late 1920s and 1930s. This, and the Wall Street Crash of 1929, brought about the worldwide Great Depression. Helped by the economic crisis, social instability and the threat of communism, fascist movements developed throughout Europe placing Adolf Hitler in power of what became Nazi Germany.
In 1933, Hitler became the leader of Germany and began to work tow
ards his goal of building Greater Germany. Germany re-expanded and took back the Saarland and Rhineland in 1935 and 1936. In 1938, Austria became a part of Germany following the Anschluss. Later that year, following the Munich Agreement signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Italy, Germany annexed the Sudetenland, which was a part of Czechoslovakia inhabited by ethnic Germans, and in early 1939, the remainder of Czechoslovakia was split into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, controlled by Germany and the Slovak Republic. At the time, the United Kingdom and France preferred a policy of appeasement.
With tensions mounting between Germany and Poland over the future of Danzig, the Germans turned to the Soviets and signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which allowed the Soviets to invade the Baltic states and parts of Poland and Romania. Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, prompting France and the United Kingdom to declare war on Germany on 3 September, opening the European Theatre of th
e Second World War. The Soviet invasion of Poland started on 17 September and Poland fell soon thereafter. On 24 September, the Soviet Union attacked the Baltic countries and, on 30 November, Finland, the latter of which was followed by the devastating Winter War for the Red Army. The British hoped to land at Narvik and send troops to aid Finland, but their primary objective in the landing was to encircle Germany and cut the Germans off from Scandinavian resources. Around the same time, Germany moved troops into Denmark. The Phoney War continued.
In May 1940, Germany attacked France through the Low Countries. France capitulated in June 1940. By August, Germany had begun a bombing offensive against the United Kingdom but failed to convince the Britons to give up. In 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa. On 7 December 1941 Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor drew the United States into the conflict as allies of the British Empire, and other allied forces.

After the staggering Battle of Sta
lingrad in 1943, the German offensive in the Soviet Union turned into a continual fallback. The Battle of Kursk, which involved the largest tank battle in history, was the last major German offensive on the Eastern Front. In June 1944, British and American forces invaded France in the D-Day landings, opening a new front against Germany. Berlin finally fell in 1945, ending the Second World War in Europe. The war was the largest and most destructive in human history, with 60 million dead across the world. More than 40 million people in Europe had died as a result of the Second World War, including between 11 and 17 million people who perished during the Holocaust. The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people (mostly civilians) during the war, about half of all Second World War casualties. By the end of the Second World War, Europe had more than 40 million refugees. Several post-war expulsions in Central and Eastern Europe displaced a total of about 20 million people.
The First World War, and especially the Se
cond World War, diminished the eminence of Western Europe in world affairs. After the Second World War the map of Europe was redrawn at the Yalta Conference and divided into two blocs, the Western countries and the communist Eastern bloc, separated by what was later called by Winston Churchill an "Iron Curtain". The United States and Western Europe established the NATO alliance and, later, the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact. Particular hot spots after the Second World War were Berlin and Trieste, whereby the Free Territory of Trieste, founded in 1947 with the UN, was dissolved in 1954 and 1975, respectively. The Berlin blockade in 1948 and 1949 and the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961 were one of the great international crises of the Cold War.
The two new superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, became locked in a fifty-year-long Cold War, centred on nuclear proliferation. At the same time decolonisation, which had already started after the First World War, grad
ually resulted in the independence of most of the European colonies in Asia and Africa.

In the 1980s the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev and the Solidarity movement in Poland weakened the previously rigid communist system. The opening of the Iron Curtain at the Pan-European Picnic then set in motion a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which the Eastern bloc, the Warsaw Pact and other communist states collapsed, and the Cold War ended. Germany was reunited, after the symbolic fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the maps of Central and Eastern Europe were redrawn once more. This made old previously interrupted cultural and economic relationships possible, and previously isolated cities such as Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest and Trieste were now again in the centre of Europe.
European integration also grew after the Second World War. In 1949 the Council of Europe was founded, following a speech by Sir Winston Churchill, with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals. It includes all European state
s except for Belarus, Russia, and Vatican City. The Treaty of Rome in 1957 established the European Economic Community between six Western European states with the goal of a unified economic policy and common market. In 1967 the EEC, European Coal and Steel Community, and Euratom formed the European Community, which in 1993 became the European Union. The EU established a parliament, court and central bank, and introduced the euro as a unified currency. Between 2004 and 2013, more Central European countries began joining, expanding the EU to 28 European countries and once more making Europe a major economical and political centre of power. However, the United Kingdom withdrew from the EU on 31 January 2020, as a result of a June 2016 referendum on EU membership. The Russo-Ukrainian conflict, which has been ongoing since 2014, steeply escalated when Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, marking the largest humanitarian and refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World War and t
he Yugoslav Wars.


== Geography ==

Europe makes up the western fifth of the Eurasian landmass. It has a higher ratio of coast to landmass than any other continent or subcontinent. Its maritime borders consist of the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Mediterranean, Black and Caspian Seas to the south.
Land relief in Europe shows great variation within relatively small areas. The southern regions are more mountainous, while moving north the terrain descends from the high Alps, Pyrenees and Carpathians, through hilly uplands, into broad, low northern plains, which are vast in the east. This extended lowland is known as the Great European Plain and at its heart lies the North German Plain. An arc of uplands also exists along the north-western seaboard, which begins in the western parts of the islands of Britain and Ireland, and then continues along the mountainous, fjord-cut spine of Norway.
This description is simplified. Subregions such as the Iberian Peninsula and the Italian 
Peninsula contain their own complex features, as does mainland Central Europe itself, where the relief contains many plateaus, river valleys and basins that complicate the general trend. Sub-regions like Iceland, Britain and Ireland are special cases. The former is a land unto itself in the northern ocean that is counted as part of Europe, while the latter are upland areas that were once joined to the mainland until rising sea levels cut them off.


=== Climate ===

Europe lies mainly in the temperate climate zone of the northern hemisphere, where the prevailing wind direction is from the west. The climate is milder in comparison to other areas of the same latitude around the globe due to the influence of the Gulf Stream, an ocean current which carries warm water from the Gulf of Mexico across the Atlantic ocean to Europe. The Gulf Stream is nicknamed "Europe's central heating", because it makes Europe's climate warmer and wetter than it would otherwise be. The Gulf Stream not only carries warm water to Europ
e's coast but also warms up the prevailing westerly winds that blow across the continent from the Atlantic Ocean.
Therefore, the average temperature throughout the year of Aveiro is 16 °C (61 °F), while it is only 13 °C (55 °F) in New York City which is almost on the same latitude, bordering the same ocean. Berlin, Germany; Calgary, Canada; and Irkutsk, in far south-eastern Russia, lie on around the same latitude; January temperatures in Berlin average around 8 °C (14 °F) higher than those in Calgary and they are almost 22 °C (40 °F) higher than average temperatures in Irkutsk.
The large water masses of the Mediterranean Sea, which equalise the temperatures on an annual and daily average, are also of particular importance. The water of the Mediterranean extends from the Sahara desert to the Alpine arc in its northernmost part of the Adriatic Sea near Trieste.
In general, Europe is not just colder towards the north compared to the south, but it also gets colder from the west towards the east. The clima
te is more oceanic in the west and less so in the east. This can be illustrated by the following table of average temperatures at locations roughly following the 64th, 60th, 55th, 50th, 45th and 40th latitudes. None of them is located at high altitude; most of them are close to the sea.

It is notable how the average temperatures for the coldest month, as well as the annual average temperatures, drop from the west to the east. For instance, Edinburgh is warmer than Belgrade during the coldest month of the year, although Belgrade is around 10° of latitude farther south.


=== Climate change ===


=== Geology ===

The geological history of Europe traces back to the formation of the Baltic Shield (Fennoscandia) and the Sarmatian craton, both around 2.25 billion years ago, followed by the Volgo–Uralia shield, the three together leading to the East European craton (≈ Baltica) which became a part of the supercontinent Columbia. Around 1.1 billion years ago, Baltica and Arctica (as part of the Laurentia block) 
became joined to Rodinia, later resplitting around 550 million years ago to reform as Baltica. Around 440 million years ago Euramerica was formed from Baltica and Laurentia; a further joining with Gondwana then leading to the formation of Pangea. Around 190 million years ago, Gondwana and Laurasia split apart due to the widening of the Atlantic Ocean. Finally and very soon afterwards, Laurasia itself split up again, into Laurentia (North America) and the Eurasian continent. The land connection between the two persisted for a considerable time, via Greenland, leading to interchange of animal species. From around 50 million years ago, rising and falling sea levels have determined the actual shape of Europe and its connections with continents such as Asia. Europe's present shape dates to the late Tertiary period about five million years ago.
The geology of Europe is hugely varied and complex and gives rise to the wide variety of landscapes found across the continent, from the Scottish Highlands to the rolling pl
ains of Hungary. Europe's most significant feature is the dichotomy between highland and mountainous Southern Europe and a vast, partially underwater, northern plain ranging from Ireland in the west to the Ural Mountains in the east. These two halves are separated by the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and Alps/Carpathians. The northern plains are delimited in the west by the Scandinavian Mountains and the mountainous parts of the British Isles. Major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the Celtic Sea, the North Sea, the Baltic Sea complex and Barents Sea.
The northern plain contains the old geological continent of Baltica and so may be regarded geologically as the "main continent", while peripheral highlands and mountainous regions in the south and west constitute fragments from various other geological continents. Most of the older geology of western Europe existed as part of the ancient microcontinent Avalonia.


=== Flora ===

Having lived side by side with agricultural people
s for millennia, Europe's animals and plants have been profoundly affected by the presence and activities of humans. With the exception of Fennoscandia and northern Russia, few areas of untouched wilderness are currently found in Europe, except for various national parks.
The main natural vegetation cover in Europe is mixed forest. The conditions for growth are very favourable. In the north, the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift warm the continent. Southern Europe has a warm but mild climate. There are frequent summer droughts in this region. Mountain ridges also affect the conditions. Some of these, such as the Alps and the Pyrenees, are oriented east–west and allow the wind to carry large masses of water from the ocean in the interior. Others are oriented south–north (Scandinavian Mountains, Dinarides, Carpathians, Apennines) and because the rain falls primarily on the side of mountains that is oriented towards the sea, forests grow well on this side, while on the other side, the conditions are much 
less favourable. Few corners of mainland Europe have not been grazed by livestock at some point in time, and the cutting down of the preagricultural forest habitat caused disruption to the original plant and animal ecosystems.

Possibly 80 to 90 percent of Europe was once covered by forest. It stretched from the Mediterranean Sea to the Arctic Ocean. Although over half of Europe's original forests disappeared through the centuries of deforestation, Europe still has over one quarter of its land area as forest, such as the broadleaf and mixed forests, taiga of Scandinavia and Russia, mixed rainforests of the Caucasus and the Cork oak forests in the western Mediterranean. During recent times, deforestation has been slowed and many trees have been planted. However, in many cases monoculture plantations of conifers have replaced the original mixed natural forest, because these grow quicker. The plantations now cover vast areas of land, but offer poorer habitats for many European forest dwelling species which requi
re a mixture of tree species and diverse forest structure. The amount of natural forest in Western Europe is just 2–3% or less, while in its Western Russia its 5–10%. The European country with the smallest percentage of forested area is Iceland (1%), while the most forested country is Finland (77%).
In temperate Europe, mixed forest with both broadleaf and coniferous trees dominate. The most important species in central and western Europe are beech and oak. In the north, the taiga is a mixed spruce–pine–birch forest; further north within Russia and extreme northern Scandinavia, the taiga gives way to tundra as the Arctic is approached. In the Mediterranean, many olive trees have been planted, which are very well adapted to its arid climate; Mediterranean Cypress is also widely planted in southern Europe. The semi-arid Mediterranean region hosts much scrub forest. A narrow east–west tongue of Eurasian grassland (the steppe) extends westwards from Ukraine and southern Russia and ends in Hungary and tr
averses into taiga to the north.


=== Fauna ===

Glaciation during the most recent ice age and the presence of humans affected the distribution of European fauna. As for the animals, in many parts of Europe most large animals and top predator species have been hunted to extinction. The woolly mammoth was extinct before the end of the Neolithic period. Today wolves (carnivores) and bears (omnivores) are endangered. Once they were found in most parts of Europe. However, deforestation and hunting caused these animals to withdraw further and further. By the Middle Ages the bears' habitats were limited to more or less inaccessible mountains with sufficient forest cover. Today, the brown bear lives primarily in the Balkan peninsula, Scandinavia and Russia; a small number also persist in other countries across Europe (Austria, Pyrenees etc.), but in these areas brown bear populations are fragmented and marginalised because of the destruction of their habitat. In addition, polar bears may be found on Svalbard, a Nor
wegian archipelago far north of Scandinavia. The wolf, the second-largest predator in Europe after the brown bear, can be found primarily in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Balkans, with a handful of packs in pockets of Western Europe (Scandinavia, Spain, etc.).

Other carnivores include the European wildcat, red fox and arctic fox, the golden jackal, different species of martens, the European hedgehog, different species of reptiles (like snakes such as vipers and grass snakes) and amphibians, as well as different birds (owls, hawks and other birds of prey).
Important European herbivores are snails, larvae, fish, different birds and mammals, like rodents, deer and roe deer, boars and living in the mountains, marmots, steinbocks, chamois among others. A number of insects, such as the small tortoiseshell butterfly, add to the biodiversity.
Sea creatures are also an important part of European flora and fauna. The sea flora is mainly phytoplankton. Important animals that live in European seas are zooplankto
n, molluscs, echinoderms, different crustaceans, squids and octopuses, fish, dolphins and whales.
Biodiversity is protected in Europe through the Council of Europe's Bern Convention, which has also been signed by the European Community as well as non-European states.


== Politics ==

The political map of Europe is substantially derived from the re-organisation of Europe following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. The prevalent form of government in Europe is parliamentary democracy, in most cases in the form of Republic; in 1815, the prevalent form of government was still the Monarchy. Europe's remaining eleven monarchies are constitutional.
European integration is the process of political, legal, economic (and in some cases social and cultural) integration of European states as it has been pursued by the powers sponsoring the Council of Europe since the end of the Second World War. The European Union has been the focus of economic integration on the continent since its foundation in 1993. More recently, the Eura
sian Economic Union has been established as a counterpart comprising former Soviet states.
27 European states are members of the politico-economic European Union, 26 of the border-free Schengen Area and 20 of the monetary union Eurozone. Among the smaller European organisations are the Nordic Council, the Benelux, the Baltic Assembly and the Visegrád Group.

The least democratic countries in Europe are Belarus, Russia and Turkey in 2024 according to the V-Dem Democracy indices.


== List of states and territories ==

This list includes all internationally recognised sovereign countries falling even partially under any common geographical or political definitions of Europe.

Within the above-mentioned states are several de facto independent countries with limited to no international recognition. None of them are members of the UN:

Several dependencies and similar territories with broad autonomy are also found within or close to Europe. This includes Åland (an autonomous county of Finland), two autonomous te
rritories of the Kingdom of Denmark (other than Denmark proper), three Crown Dependencies and two British Overseas Territories. Svalbard is also included due to its unique status within Norway, although it is not autonomous. Not included are the three countries of the United Kingdom with devolved powers and the two Autonomous Regions of Portugal, which despite having a unique degree of autonomy, are not largely self-governing in matters other than international affairs. Areas with little more than a unique tax status, such as the Canary Islands and Heligoland, are also not included for this reason.


== Economy ==

As a continent, the economy of Europe is currently the largest on Earth and it is the richest region as measured by assets under management with over $32.7 trillion compared to North America's $27.1 trillion in 2008. In 2009 Europe remained the wealthiest region. Its $37.1 trillion in assets under management represented one-third of the world's wealth. It was one of several regions where wealth sur
passed its precrisis year-end peak. As with other continents, Europe has a large wealth gap among its countries. The richer states tend to be in the Northwest and West in general, followed by Central Europe, while most economies of Eastern and Southeastern Europe are still reemerging from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The model of the Blue Banana was designed as an economic geographic representation of the respective economic power of the regions, which was further developed into the Golden Banana or Blue Star. The trade between East and West, as well as towards Asia, which had been disrupted for a long time by the two world wars, new borders and the Cold War, increased sharply after 1989. In addition, there is new impetus from the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative across the Suez Canal towards Africa and Asia.
The European Union, a political entity composed of 27 European states, comprises the largest single economic area in the world. Nineteen EU countries share the euro as 
a common currency.
Five European countries rank in the top ten of the world's largest national economies in GDP (PPP). This includes (ranks according to the CIA): Germany (6), Russia (7), the United Kingdom (10), France (11) and Italy (13).
Some European countries are much richer than others. The richest in terms of nominal GDP is Monaco with its US$185,829 per capita (2018) and the poorest is Ukraine with its US$3,659 per capita (2019).
As a whole, Europe's GDP per capita is US$21,767 according to a 2016 International Monetary Fund assessment.


=== Economic history ===
Industrial growth (1760–1945)
Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism. From Britain, it gradually spread throughout Europe. The Industrial Revolution started in Europe, specifically the United Kingdom in the late 18th century, and the 19th century saw Western Europe industrialise. Economies were disrupted by the First World War, but by the beginning of the Second World War, they had recovered and were ha
ving to compete with the growing economic strength of the United States. The Second World War, again, damaged much of Europe's industries.

Cold War (1945–1991)

After the Second World War the economy of the UK was in a state of ruin, and continued to suffer relative economic decline in the following decades. Italy was also in a poor economic condition but regained a high level of growth by the 1950s. West Germany recovered quickly and had doubled production from pre-war levels by the 1950s. France also staged a remarkable comeback enjoying rapid growth and modernisation; later on Spain, under the leadership of Franco, also recovered and the nation recorded huge unprecedented economic growth beginning in the 1960s in what is called the Spanish miracle. The majority of Central and Eastern European states came under the control of the Soviet Union and thus were members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON).
The states which retained a free-market system were given a large amount of aid by th
e United States under the Marshall Plan. The western states moved to link their economies together, providing the basis for the EU and increasing cross border trade. This helped them to enjoy rapidly improving economies, while those states in COMECON were struggling in a large part due to the cost of the Cold War. Until 1990, the European Community was expanded from 6 founding members to 12. The emphasis placed on resurrecting the West German economy led to it overtaking the UK as Europe's largest economy.

Reunification (1991–present)

With the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe in 1991, the post-socialist states underwent shock therapy measures to liberalise their economies and implement free market reforms.
After East and West Germany were reunited in 1990, the economy of West Germany struggled as it had to support and largely rebuild the infrastructure of East Germany, while the latter experienced sudden mass unemployment and plummeting of industrial production.
By the millennium change, th
e EU dominated the economy of Europe, comprising the five largest European economies of the time: Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Spain. In 1999, 12 of the 15 members of the EU joined the Eurozone, replacing their national currencies by the euro.
Figures released by Eurostat in 2009 confirmed that the Eurozone had gone into recession in 2008. It impacted much of the region. In 2010, fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed concerning some countries in Europe, especially Greece, Ireland, Spain and Portugal. As a result, measures were taken, especially for Greece, by the leading countries of the Eurozone. The EU-27 unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2012. For those aged 15–24 it was 22.4%.


== Demographics ==

The population of Europe was about 742 million in 2023 according to UN estimates. This is slightly more than one ninth of the world's population. The population density of Europe (the number of people per area) is the second highest of any continent, behind Asia. The population of Europe 
is currently slowly decreasing, by about 0.2% per year, because there are fewer births than deaths. This natural decrease in population is reduced by the fact that more people migrate to Europe from other continents than vice versa.
Southern Europe and Western Europe are the regions with the highest average number of elderly people in the world. In 2021, the percentage of people over 65 years old was 21% in Western Europe and Southern Europe, compared to 19% in all of Europe and 10% in the world. Projections suggest that by 2050 Europe will reach 30%. This is caused by the fact that the population has been having children below replacement level since the 1970s. The United Nations predicts that Europe will decline its population between 2022 and 2050 by −7 per cent, without changing immigration movements.
According to a population projection of the UN Population Division, Europe's population may fall to between 680 and 720 million people by 2050, which would be 7% of the world population at that time. Withi
n this context, significant disparities exist between regions in relation to fertility rates. The average number of children per female of child-bearing age is 1.52, far below the replacement rate. The UN predicts a steady population decline in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of emigration and low birth rates.


=== Ethnic groups ===

Pan and Pfeil (2004) count 87 distinct "peoples of Europe", of which 33 form the majority population in at least one sovereign state, while the remaining 54 constitute ethnic minorities.


=== Migration ===

Europe is home to the highest number of migrants of all global regions at nearly 87 million people in 2020, according to the International Organisation for Migration. In 2005, the EU had an overall net gain from immigration of 1.8 million people. This accounted for almost 85% of Europe's total population growth. In 2021, 827,000 persons were given citizenship of an EU member state, an increase of about 14% compared with 2020. 2.3 million immigrants from non-EU countri
es entered the EU in 2021.
Early modern emigration from Europe began with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century, and French and English settlers in the 17th century. But numbers remained relatively small until waves of mass emigration in the 19th century, when millions of poor families left Europe.
Today, large populations of European descent are found on every continent. European ancestry predominates in North America and to a lesser degree in South America (particularly in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Brazil, while most of the other Latin American countries also have a considerable population of European origins). Australia and New Zealand have large European-derived populations. Africa has no countries with European-derived majorities (or with the exception of Cape Verde and probably São Tomé and Príncipe, depending on context), but there are significant minorities, such as the White South Africans in South Africa. In Asia, European-derived populations, specifically Russians, predominate 
in North Asia and some parts of Northern Kazakhstan.


=== Languages ===

Europe has about 225 indigenous languages, mostly falling within three Indo-European language groups: the Romance languages, derived from the Latin of the Roman Empire; the Germanic languages, whose ancestor language came from southern Scandinavia; and the Slavic languages. Slavic languages are mostly spoken in Southern, Central and Eastern Europe. Romance languages are spoken primarily in Western and Southern Europe, as well as in Switzerland in Central Europe and Romania and Moldova in Eastern Europe. Germanic languages are spoken in Western, Northern and Central Europe as well as in Gibraltar and Malta in Southern Europe. Languages in adjacent areas show significant overlaps (such as in English, for example). Other Indo-European languages outside the three main groups include the Baltic group (Latvian and Lithuanian), the Celtic group (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish and Breton), Greek, Armenian and Albanian.
A distinct 
non-Indo-European family of Uralic languages (Estonian, Finnish, Hungarian, Erzya, Komi, Mari, Moksha and Udmurt) is spoken mainly in Estonia, Finland, Hungary and parts of Russia. Turkic languages include Azerbaijani, Kazakh and Turkish, in addition to smaller languages in Eastern and Southeast Europe (Balkan Gagauz Turkish, Bashkir, Chuvash, Crimean Tatar, Karachay-Balkar, Kumyk, Nogai and Tatar). Kartvelian languages (Georgian, Mingrelian and Svan) are spoken primarily in Georgia. Two other language families reside in the North Caucasus (termed Northeast Caucasian, most notably including Chechen, Avar and Lezgin; and Northwest Caucasian, most notably including Adyghe). Maltese is the only Semitic language that is official within the EU, while Basque is the only European language isolate.
Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Europe today. The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of 
Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.


=== Religion ===

The largest religion in Europe is Christianity, with 76.2% of Europeans considering themselves Christians, including Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and various Protestant denominations. Among Protestants, the most popular are Lutheranism, Anglicanism and the Reformed faith. Smaller Protestant denominations include Anabaptists as well as denominations centered in the United States such as Pentecostalism, Methodism, and Evangelicalism. Although Christianity originated in the Middle East, its centre of mass shifted to Europe when it became the official religion of the Roman Empire in the late 4th century. Christianity played a prominent role in the development of the European culture and identity. Today, a bit over 25% of the world's Christians live in Europe.
Islam is the second most popular religion in Europe. Over 25 million, or roughly 5% of the population, adhere to it. In Alb
ania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, two countries in the Balkan peninsula in Southeastern Europe, Islam instead of Christianity is the majority religion. This is also the case in Turkey and in certain parts of Russia, as well as in Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, all of which are at the border to Asia. Many countries in Europe are home to a sizeable Muslim minority, and immigration to Europe has increased the number of Muslim people in Europe in recent years.
The Jewish population in Europe was about 1.4 million people in 2020 (about 0.2% of the population). There is a long history of Jewish life in Europe, beginning in antiquity. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Russian Empire had the majority of the world's Jews living within its borders. In 1897, according to Russian census of 1897, the total Jewish population of Russia was 5.1 million people, which was 4.13% of total population. Of this total, the vast majority lived within the Pale of Settlement. In 1933, there were about 9.5 million Jewish peo
ple in Europe, representing 1.7% of the population, but most were killed, and most of the rest displaced, during The Holocaust. In the 21st century, France has the largest Jewish population in Europe, followed by the United Kingdom, Germany and Russia.
Other religions practiced in Europe include Hinduism and Buddhism, which are minority religions, except in Russia's Republic of Kalmykia, where Tibetan Buddhism is the majority religion.
A large and increasing number of people in Europe are irreligious, atheist and agnostic. They are estimated to make up about 18.3% of Europe's population currently.


=== Major cities and urban areas ===

The three largest urban areas of Europe are Moscow, London and Paris. All have over 10 million residents, and as such have been described as megacities. While Istanbul has the highest total city population, it lies partly in Asia. 64.9% of the residents live on the European side and 35.1% on the Asian side.
The next largest cities in order of population are Madrid, Saint Peter
sburg, Milan, Barcelona, Berlin, and Rome each having over three million residents.
When considering the commuter belts or metropolitan areas within Europe (for which comparable data is available), Moscow covers the largest population, followed in order by Istanbul, London, Paris, Madrid, Milan, Ruhr Area, Saint Petersburg, Rhein-Süd, Barcelona and Berlin.


== Culture ==

"Europe" as a cultural concept is substantially derived from the shared heritage of ancient Greece and the Roman Empire and its cultures. The boundaries of Europe were historically understood as those of Christendom (or more specifically Latin Christendom), as established or defended throughout the medieval and early modern history of Europe, especially against Islam, as in the Reconquista and the Ottoman wars in Europe.
This shared cultural heritage is combined by overlapping indigenous national cultures and folklores, roughly divided into Slavic, Latin (Romance) and Germanic, but with several components not part of either of these groups
 (notably Greek, Basque and Celtic). Historically, special examples with overlapping cultures are Strasbourg with Latin (Romance) and Germanic, or Trieste with Latin, Slavic and Germanic roots.
Cultural contacts and mixtures shape a large part of the regional cultures of Europe. Europe is often described as "maximum cultural diversity with minimal geographical distances".
Different cultural events are organised in Europe, with the aim of bringing different cultures closer together and raising awareness of their importance, such as the European Capital of Culture, the European Region of Gastronomy, the European Youth Capital and the European Capital of Sport.


=== Sport ===


=== Social dimension ===
In Europe many people are unable to access basic social conditions, which makes it harder for them to thrive and flourish. Access to basic necessities can be compromised, for example 10% of Europeans spend at least 40% of household income on housing. 75 million Europeans feel socially isolated. From the 1980s inc
ome inequality has been rising and wage shares have been falling. In 2016, the richest 20% of households earned over five times more than the poorest 20%. Many workers experience stagnant real wages and precarious work is common even for essential workers.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
National Geographic Society (2005). National Geographic Visual History of the World. Washington, DC: National Geographic Society. ISBN 0-7922-3695-5.
Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2011). The Earth and Its Peoples, Brief Edition. Vol. 1. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-91311-5.
Brown, Stephen F.; Anatolios, Khaled; Palmer, Martin (2009). O'Brien, Joanne (ed.). Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60413-106-2.
Laiou, Angeliki E.; Morisson, Cécile (2007). The Byzantine Economy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84978-4.
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären (1997). The Myth of Contine
nts: A Critique of Metageography. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1.
Pounds, Norman John Greville (1979). An Historical Geography of Europe, 1500–1840. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22379-9.


== External links ==
Europe web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries
Europe at the Encyclopædia Britannica
Europe: Human Geography at the National Geographic Society
Europe at Curlie
European Reading Room from the United States Library of Congress
"Europe" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 9 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 907–953.
The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online Columbia University Press
Historical Maps

Borders in Europe 3000BC to the present Geacron Historical atlas
Online history of Europe in 21 maps

===Images===
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9d/1916_political_map_of_Europe.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/86/Africa_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9d/Afro-Eurasia_%28orthographic_projection%29_political.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8f/Alliances_militaires_en_Europe_1914-1918-fr.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/ca/Americas_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a0/Anaximander_world_map-en.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f2/Antarctica_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6e/Arms_of_Andorra.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/eb/Arms_of_Armenia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/66/Arms_of_Cyprus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7b/Arms_of_Georgia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dc/Arms_of_Gibr
altar_%28Variant%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/18/Arms_of_Hungary.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/03/Arms_of_Iceland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/06/Arms_of_Malta.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/01/Arms_of_Moldova.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9b/Arms_of_Montenegro.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b3/Arms_of_Spain.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/36/Arms_of_the_French_Republic.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bd/Arms_of_the_Republic_of_Ireland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2d/Arms_of_the_Turkish_Republic_of_Northern_Cyprus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2b/Arms_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/80/Asia_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e8/Australia-New_Guinea_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://uplo
ad.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5a/Austria_coat_of_arms_official.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c2/Barcelona_vs_Inter_2019_2.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Royal_arms_of_Norway.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/12/Blason_pays_Monaco.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/01/Business_Centre_of_Moscow_2.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ed/Carte_zone_euro.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0c/Coat_of_Arms_of_Finland_Alternative_style.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c8/Coat_of_Arms_of_Jersey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b4/Coat_of_Arms_of_Switzerland_%28Pantone%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f2/Coat_of_Arms_of_the_Russian_Federation.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/80/Coat_of_arms_of_Abkhazia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6e/Coat_of_arms_of_Albania.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/
wikipedia/commons/3/30/Coat_of_arms_of_Belarus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d4/Coat_of_arms_of_Bosnia_and_Herzegovina.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4f/Coat_of_arms_of_Bulgaria_%28version_by_constitution%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c9/Coat_of_arms_of_Croatia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/da/Coat_of_arms_of_Germany.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dd/Coat_of_arms_of_Greenland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/01/Coat_of_arms_of_Guernsey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7e/Coat_of_arms_of_Isle_of_Man.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d7/Emblem_of_the_Republic_of_Kosovo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dd/Coat_of_arms_of_Lithuania.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Coat_of_arms_of_North_Macedonia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/70/Coat_of_arms_of_Romania.svg
https://upload.wikime
dia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0f/Coat_of_arms_of_Serbia_small.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d2/Coat_of_arms_of_Slovakia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8f/Coat_of_arms_of_Slovenia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/ad/Emblem_of_South_Ossetia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/81/Coat_of_arms_of_Transnistria.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f3/Coat_of_arms_of_Vatican_City_State_-_2023_version.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9b/Coat_of_arms_of_the_Faroe_Islands.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5c/Coat_of_arms_of_%C3%85land.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e2/Colonisation_1914.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/da/Demographics_of_Europe.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d4/EU_Member_States%27_CoA_Series-_Luxembourg.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6b/Emblem_of_Azerbaijan.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.
org/wikipedia/commons/0/00/Emblem_of_Italy.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ee/Emblem_of_Kazakhstan_latin.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/ad/Emblem_of_South_Ossetia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d7/Emblem_of_the_Republic_of_Kosovo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/30/Eurasia_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4e/Europa_Prima_Pars_Terrae_in_Forma_Virginis.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/Europe20000ya.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c6/Europe_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/ac/Europe_1815_map_en.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1f/Europe_843ad_viking_incursions_map.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f8/Europe_around_650.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/66/Europe_biogeography_countries_en.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/c
ommons/6/66/Europe_biogeography_countries_en.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/ad/Europe_geological_map-en.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/Europe_land_use_map.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/Europe_orthographic_Caucasus_Urals_boundary.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/44/Europe_orthographic_Caucasus_Urals_boundary_%28with_borders%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/39/Europe_polar_stereographic_Caucasus_Urals_boundary.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3f/European_Ancestry_Large.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/36/Flag_of_Albania.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/19/Flag_of_Andorra.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2f/Flag_of_Armenia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/41/Flag_of_Austria.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/85/Flag_of_Belarus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/92/
Flag_of_Belgium_%28civil%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bf/Flag_of_Bosnia_and_Herzegovina.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9a/Flag_of_Bulgaria.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1b/Flag_of_Croatia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d4/Flag_of_Cyprus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9c/Flag_of_Denmark.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8f/Flag_of_Estonia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b7/Flag_of_Europe.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bc/Flag_of_Finland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0f/Flag_of_Georgia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/02/Flag_of_Gibraltar.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5c/Flag_of_Greece.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/09/Flag_of_Greenland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fa/Flag_of_Guernsey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia
/commons/c/c1/Flag_of_Hungary.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/ce/Flag_of_Iceland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/45/Flag_of_Ireland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/Flag_of_Jersey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d3/Flag_of_Kazakhstan.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1f/Flag_of_Kosovo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/84/Flag_of_Latvia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/47/Flag_of_Liechtenstein.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/11/Flag_of_Lithuania.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/da/Flag_of_Luxembourg.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Flag_of_Malta.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/27/Flag_of_Moldova.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ea/Flag_of_Monaco.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/64/Flag_of_Montenegro.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/comm
ons/7/79/Flag_of_North_Macedonia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d9/Flag_of_Norway.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5c/Flag_of_Portugal.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Flag_of_Romania.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/Flag_of_San_Marino.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/ff/Flag_of_Serbia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e6/Flag_of_Slovakia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f0/Flag_of_Slovenia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/12/Flag_of_South_Ossetia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/08/Flag_of_Switzerland_%28Pantone%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bc/Flag_of_Transnistria_%28state%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b4/Flag_of_Turkey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/49/Flag_of_Ukraine.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/cb/Flag_of_the_Czech_Republic.
svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3c/Flag_of_the_Faroe_Islands.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bc/Flag_of_the_Isle_of_Man.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/20/Flag_of_the_Netherlands.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7a/Flag_of_the_Republic_of_Abkhazia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/Flag_of_the_Turkish_Republic_of_Northern_Cyprus.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/39/Flag_of_the_Vatican_City_%282023%E2%80%93present%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/52/Flag_of_%C3%85land.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/Floristic_regions_in_Europe_%28english%29.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/16/Frankish_Empire_481_to_814-en.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b7/GrandeArche.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c0/Grossgliederung_Europas-en.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/db/Habsburg_domini
ons_1700.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c9/Herb_Polski.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Herman_Moll_A_New_Map_of_Europe_According_to_the_Newest_Observations_1721.JPG
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b0/Increase2.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9b/Increase_of_average_yearly_temperature_in_Europe_%281900-2017%29.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f1/Insigne_Sancti_Marini.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c8/Coat_of_Arms_of_Jersey.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d5/Koppen-Geiger_Map_Europe_present.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/31/La_scuola_di_Atene.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/Lascaux_painting.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/95/Lesser_Coat_of_Arms_of_Ukraine.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/Lesser_arms_of_Liechtenstein.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/99/Lesser_c
oat_of_arms_of_Greece.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c7/Lesser_coat_of_arms_of_Latvia_%28escutcheon%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/43/Location_North_America.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a9/Map_of_European_countries_by_GDP_%28PPP%29_per_capita_in_2021.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e8/Map_of_populous_Europe_%28physical%2C_political%2C_population%29_with_legend.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/19/Mappa_delle_Repubbliche_marinare_italiane_con_stemmi_civici.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6c/Marshall%27s_flax-mill%2C_Holbeck%2C_Leeds_-_interior_-_c.1800.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/56/Mongols_suzdal.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/88/Mussolini_and_Hitler_1940_%28retouched%29.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d1/National_Coat_of_arms_of_Denmark_no_crown.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/26/Neandertal_
-_Wisent.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8e/Oceania_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/86/Philip_II_and_Tancred_meeting_in_Messina_-_British_Library_Royal_MS_16_G_vi_f350r_%28detail%29.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Possible_definitions_of_the_boundary_between_Europe_and_Asia.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ea/Roman_Republic_Empire_map.gif
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Royal_Arms_of_Belgium.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5a/Royal_Arms_of_the_Netherlands.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Royal_arms_of_Norway.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4a/Serbiancolumnretreat1915.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a1/Shield_of_arms_of_Sweden.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/90/Shield_of_the_Kingdom_of_Portugal_%281481-1910%29.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/55/Simpli
fied_Languages_of_Europe_map.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a2/Small_coat_of_arms_of_Estonia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/20/Small_coat_of_arms_of_the_Czech_Republic.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0f/South_America_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f2/Stonehenge%2C_Condado_de_Wiltshire%2C_Inglaterra%2C_2014-08-12%2C_DD_09.JPG
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e9/Super_moon_over_City_of_London_from_Tate_Modern_2018-01-31_4.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Supranational_European_Bodies.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Supranational_European_Bodies.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/83/Symbol_template_class_pink.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/70/T_and_O_map_Guntherus_Ziner_1472.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/Terra.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/da/The_P
arthenon_in_Athens.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/West_and_East_Germans_at_the_Brandenburg_Gate_in_1989.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/58/Trepca_Miners_%2824876825%29.jpeg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/V-Dem_Electoral_Democracy_Index_2023_Europe.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c5/Vegetation_Europe.png
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/85/View_of_Levent_financial_district_from_Istanbul_Sapphire.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/West_and_East_Germans_at_the_Brandenburg_Gate_in_1989.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dd/Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dd/Flag_of_Azerbaijan.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/c/c3/F
lag_of_France.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/ba/Flag_of_Germany.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/0/03/Flag_of_Italy.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/1/12/Flag_of_Poland.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/f/f3/Flag_of_Russia.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/9/9a/Flag_of_Spain.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4c/Flag_of_Sweden.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/8/8a/OOjs_UI_icon_edit-ltr-progressive.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/1/1b/Semi-protection-shackle.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/9/96/Symbol_category_class.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/e2/Symbol_portal_class.svg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/97/The_Earth_seen_from_Apollo_17.jpg
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/05/Yalta_Conference_%28Churchill%2C_Roosevelt%2C_Stalin%29_%28B%26W%29.jpg
===Links===
2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum
20th-century Western painting
2nd Spanish Armada
3rd Spanish Armada
68–95–99.7 rule
ABCANZ Armies
ANZUS
AUKUS
Abkhazia
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United Kingdom
Abrahamic Religions
Achaemenid Empire
Administrative divisions of Europe
Administrative divisions of France
Adolf Hitler
Adriatic Sea
Adyghe language
Aegean Sea
Africa
African Great Lakes
Afro-Eurasia
Age of Discovery
Age of Enlightenment
Age of Migrations
Age of Revolution
Ageing of Europe
Ages of consent in Europe
Agnosticism
Akkadian language
Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Al-Andalus
Alaska
Albania
Albanian diaspora
Albanian language
Alcuin
Alderney
Alfred A. Knopf
Allies of World War II
Alphabet
Alpine tundra
Alps
Amasia (supercontinent)
Amazon basin
Amazonian Craton
American Economic Association
American Revolutionary War
Americas
Amsterdam
Anabaptists
Analytic philosophy
Anatolia
Anaximander
Ancient Celtic religion
Ancient Greece
Ancient Greek
Ancient Greek language
Ancient Gr
eek philosophy
Ancient Olympic Games
Ancient Roman philosophy
Ancient Rome
Andean states
Andorra
Andorra la Vella
Angeliki Laiou
Angles (tribe)
Anglicanism
Anglo-America
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
Anglo-Saxon paganism
Ankara
Anschluss
Antarctic
Antarctic Convergence
Antarctica
Antoninus Pius
Apennine Mountains
Appalachia
Appeasement
ArXiv (identifier)
Arabian Peninsula
Arabic
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Archaeological Site of Atapuerca
Archaic Greece
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria
Archimedes
Architecture
Arctic
Arctic Council
Arctic Ocean
Arctic fox
Arctica
Area and population of European countries
Argentina
Argentines of European descent
Aridoamerica
Aristotle
Arkhangelsk
Armenia
Armenian diaspora
Armenian language
Armorial of Europe
Aromanian diaspora
Art of Europe
Aruba
Asia
Asia Minor
Asiamerica
Asia–Pacific
Association football
Astana
Astrakhan
Asturians
Asturias
Atapuerca Mountains
Atatürk
Atheism
Athenian democracy
Athens
Atlantic Canada
Atlantic Europe
Atlantic Ocean
Atlantic ocean
Atlantica
Atlant
icism
Atlantis
Attack on Pearl Harbor
Augustus
Aurica (supercontinent)
Ausgleich
Australasia
Australia
Australia (continent)
Austria
Austria-Hungary
Austrian Empire
Austrians Abroad
Austro-Hungarian empire
Autonomous Regions of Portugal
Autonomous administrative division
Avalonia
Avar language
Aveiro, Portugal
Avignon
Azali Bábism
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijani diaspora
Azerbaijani language
Azores
BBC
BBC News
Baffin Bay
Baháʼí Faith
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Baku
Balance of power (international relations)
Balkan
Balkan Gagauz Turkish
Balkan Wars
Balkan peninsula
Balkans
Baltic Assembly
Baltic Sea
Baltic Shield
Baltic languages
Baltic mythology
Baltic states
Baltica
Barcelona
Barents Sea
Bashkir language
Basque culture
Basque diaspora
Basque language
Basque people
Battle of Berlin
Battle of Britain
Battle of France
Battle of Kursk
Battle of Manzikert
Battle of Prokhorovka
Battle of Stalingrad
Battle of Tours
Battle of Vienna
Battle of Waterloo
Battles of Narvik
Batu Khan
Bauxite
Bay of Biscay
Baydaratskaya Bay
Bear
B
eech
Beggars
Belarus
Belarusian diaspora
Belgian diaspora
Belgium
Belgrade
Belt and Road Initiative
Benelux
Benito Mussolini
Beringia
Berlin
Berlin Wall
Berlin blockade
Bern
Białowieża Forest
Bibcode (identifier)
Bible Belt
Bibliography of Europe
Bibliography of European history
Biogeography
Biome
Birch
Black Death
Black Sea
Blue Banana
Bologna Process
Bordeaux
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnian diaspora
Bosporus
Boundaries between the continents
Boundaries between the continents of Earth
Boundary between Europe and Asia
Bratislava
Brazil
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Breton language
Breton people
Brian M. Fagan
British Empire
British English
British Future
British Isles
British Overseas Territories
British diaspora
British–Irish Council
Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary
Bronze Age Europe
Brussels
Bucharest
Bucharest Nine
Budapest
Buddhism
Bulgaria
Bulgarian diaspora
Bulgars
Burial mound
Byzantine Empire
Byzantine–Sasanian wars
Byzantium
Bábism
CIA
CIA World Factbook
COVID-19 pandemic in Europe
Cambridge
 University Press
Camp Nou
Canadian Prairies
Canary Islands
Cape Verde
Capital (political)
Capital city
Capitalism
Cardial Ware
Caribbean
Carnivore
Carolingian
Carolingian Empire
Carolingian Renaissance
Carpathian Mountains
Carpathians
Caspian Sea
Catalans
Cathaysia
Cathedral school
Catholic
Catholic Church
Caucasus
Caucasus Mountains
Causewayed enclosure
Celtic Europe
Celtic Sea
Celtic languages
Celtic nations
Central Africa
Central America
Central Asia
Central Europe
Central European Free Trade Agreement
Central Powers
Central and Eastern Europe
Centralised government
Centralized government
Ceuta
Chalcolithic
Channel Islands
Chant
Charlemagne
Charles Martel
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
Chechen diaspora
Chechen language
Child labour
Chile
Chilenia
China
Chișinău
Chris Scarre
Christendom
Christian culture
Christian existentialism
Christian humanism
Christian philosophy
Christianity
Christianity as the Roman state religion
Christianity in Europe
Christianization
Christians
Christopher Columbus
Chronology of
 continents
Chuvash language
Cimmeria (continent)
Cinema of Europe
Cinquecento
Circassian diaspora
Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution
City of San Marino
City states
Classical Greece
Classical antiquity
Classical music
Classical tradition
Classics
Cleisthenes
Climate change
Climate change in Europe
Climate change mitigation
Climate of Europe
Clovis I
Cobalt
Code of Justinian
Coimbra
Cold War
Collapse of the Soviet Union
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Colonial empire
Columbia (supercontinent)
Columbia University Press
Common Travel Area
Commonwealth of Independent States
Communist
Confederation
Congo Craton
Congress of Berlin
Congress of Vienna
Conservatism
Constantine I
Constantine the Great and Christianity
Constantinople
Constitutional monarchy
Constitutionalism
Continent
Continental Europe
Continental climate
Continental fragment
Continental philosophy
Continental shelf
Continents
Continuum International Publishing Group
Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Ha
bitats
Copenhagen
Copernicus
Corded Ware
Cork oak
Cornish diaspora
Cornish language
Corsican people
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
Council of Europe
Counties of Finland
Countries of the United Kingdom
Cradle of civilization
Craiova Group
Crete
Crimean-Nogai raids into East Slavic lands
Crimean Khanate
Crimean Tatar diaspora
Crimean Tatar language
Crimean Tatars
Crisis of the Late Middle Ages
Crisis situations and unrest in Europe since 2000
Cro-Magnons
Croatia
Croatian diaspora
Crown Dependencies
Crusades
Crustacean
Cultural Muslim
Culture of Europe
Cuman-Kipchak Confederation
Cumans
Cupressus sempervirens
Curaçao
Curlie
Cuyania
Cyprus
Cyprus in the Middle Ages
Cyrillic script
Czech Republic
Czech diaspora
Czechoslovakia
Danes
Danish Realm
Danube
Dark Ages (historiography)
De facto
De jure
Dead Sea
Decline of Christianity in the Western world
Decline of the Roman Empire
Decolonisation
Deforestation
Delian Apollo
Democracy
Democracy in Europe
Demographics of Cyprus
Demographics of Europe
Demographics 
of the world
Demonym
Denmark
Dependent territory
Diet of Worms
Dinaric Alps
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Doggerland
Doi (identifier)
Dolphin
Don River (Russia)
Donetsk People's Republic
Douglas, Isle of Man
Douglas Freshfield
Dover Publications
Drainage divide
Druze
Dry steppe
Dublin
Duchy of Croatia
Duchy of Milan
Dutch diaspora
Dutch language
Düsseldorf
EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Early European Farmers
Early Middle Ages
Early Modern history of Germany
Early Muslim conquests
Early modern Europe
Early modern period
Early world maps
Earth
East-West Schism
East Africa
East Antarctic Shield
East Asia
East Central Europe
East Coast of the United States
East European craton
East Francia
East Germany
Eastern Bloc
Eastern Canada
Eastern Christianity
Eastern Europe
Eastern Front (World War II)
Eastern Hemisphere
Eastern Orthodox
Eastern Orthodox Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Eastern Partnership
Eastern Question
Eastern Roman Empire
Eastern bloc
East–West Schism
East–West dichotomy
Echinoderm
Economic 
history of Europe (1000 AD–present)
Economic history of the German reunification
Economy of Europe
Economy of the European Union
Edinburgh
Education in France
Educational policies and initiatives of the European Union
Effects of climate change
Effects of climate change on human health
El Pais
Elections in India
Elections to the European Parliament
Emancipation
Emba River
Emigration from Europe
Emigration from Kosovo
Emirate of Crete
Emirate of Sicily
Empire of Japan
Empiricism
Encyclopædia Britannica
Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition
Energy in Europe
Energy transition
England
English (language)
English Armada
English diaspora
English language
Enlargement of the European Union
Entente Powers
Epigravettian
Epithet
Equality before the law
Erasmus Programme
Eric Franklin Wood
Erzya language
Essen
Essential workers
Estonia
Estonian language
Estonians
Ethnic groups in Europe
Ethnic minority
Etiquette in Europe
Euclid
Euler diagram
Euramerica
Eurasia
Eurasian Customs Union
Eurasian Economic Community
Eura
sian Economic Union
Eurasian wolf
Euratom
Euripides
Euro
Eurocentrism
Eurodistrict
Eurolinguistics
Euronest Parliamentary Assembly
Euronews
Europa (consort of Zeus)
Europa regina
Europe
Europe (disambiguation)
European Americans
European Australians
European Bronze Age
European Canadians
European Capital of Culture
European Central Bank
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
European Civil Aviation Conference
European Coal and Steel Community
European Commissioner for Climate Action
European Community
European Court of Justice
European Economic Area
European Economic Community
European Free Trade Association
European Games
European Green Deal
European Iron Age
European Moroccans
European Neighbourhood Policy
European Neolithic
European New Zealanders
European Pakistanis
European Parliament
European Political Community
European Region of Gastronomy
European Russia
European Space Agency
European Theatre of World War II
European Tunisians
European Union
European Union Customs Union
European Union as
 a potential superpower
European Union statistics
European Youth Capital
European art
European bison
European brown bear
European countries by electricity consumption per person
European countries by health expense per person
European countries by military expenditure as a percentage of government expenditure
European countries by percent of population aged 0-14
European countries by percentage of urban population
European cuisine
European culture
European dances
European diaspora
European emigration
European folklore
European hedgehog
European identity
European integration
European microstates
European mythology
European single market
European sovereign-debt crisis
European treaties
European wars of religion
European wildcat
Europus (Almopia)
Euroregion
Eurosphere
Eurostat
Eurozone
Evangelical Protestants
Exclave
Existentialism
Exsurge Domine
Extreme points of Europe
Extreme weather
FAO
Factory Acts
Fall of Constantinople
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
Far East
Faroe Islands
Fascism

Fauna of Europe
Federation
Fennoscandia
Ferdinand Magellan
Fertility rates
Feudalism
Fifth-century Athens
Financial and social rankings of sovereign states in Europe
Finland
Finnish diaspora
Finnish language
Finnish paganism
First Austrian Republic
First Bulgarian Empire
First French Empire
First World War
Five Eyes
Fjord
Flag
Flag of Europe
Flags of Europe
Flemish people
Flora Europaea
Florence
Flowering plant
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Foreign relations of the European Union
Forest
Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America
Fourth Crusade
Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
France
France in the Middle Ages
Francia
Francisco Franco
Frangistan
Frankish mythology
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Franks
Frans Timmermans
Franz Josef Land
Free-market
Free Territory of Trieste
Free trade agreements of the European Union
Free trade areas in Europe
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Freedom of the press
Freedom of thought
French America
French First Republic
French Revolution
Fr
ench Third Republic
French diaspora
French language
Ft.com
G7
GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development
Galen
Galicians
Galileo
Gaul
Gavrilo Princip
Gdańsk
Geissenklösterle
Genetic history of Europe
Genitive case
Geography (Ptolemy)
Geography of Europe
Geological history of Europe
Geology of Europe
Georgia (country)
Georgian diaspora
Georgian language
German Empire
German diaspora
German language
Germanic-speaking Europe
Germanic languages
Germanic paganism
Germanic peoples
Germany
Gibraltar
Giovanni Boccaccio
Glacial period
Glasnost
Global East
Global North and Global South
Global Northwest
Global Southeast
Global Southwest
Golden Banana
Golden Horde
Golden jackal
Gondwana
Good Friday Agreement
Gothic paganism
Goths
Governance of Europe
Government of Europe
Governorate (Russia)
Granada War
Grand Alliance (League of Augsburg)
Grand Duchy of Lithuania
Grand Duchy of Moscow
Grassland
Great Australian Bight
Great Barrier Reef
Great Depression
Great Divergence
Great European Plain
Great Famine (I
reland)
Great Famine of 1315–1317
Great Lakes region
Great Moravia
Great Power
Great Purge
Greater Caucasus
Greater Caucasus watershed
Greco-Persian Wars
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Greek Cypriot diaspora
Greek Orthodox Church
Greek War of Independence
Greek alphabet
Greek culture
Greek diaspora
Greek language
Greek mythology
Greeks
Greenhouse gas emissions
Greenland
Greenland Sea
Gregorian calendar
Gross domestic product
Guernsey
Gulag
Gulf Stream
Gulf of Cádiz
Gulf of Mexico
Günther Zainer
Habsburg monarchy
Hagia Sophia
Halford Mackinder
Ham (son of Noah)
Hawk
Hdl (identifier)
Healthcare in Europe
Heat wave
Hebrew language
Hecataeus of Miletus
Hegemony
Heligoland
Hellenistic period
Hellenistic philosophy
Hellenistic religion
Helsinki
Herman Moll
Herodotus
High Middle Ages
Hilaire Belloc
Himalayan states
Hinduism
Hippocrates
Hispania
Hispanic America
Historical atlas
Histories (Herodotus)
Historiography
History of Europe
History of European universities
History of Islam in southern Italy
History of Western 
civilization
History of Western fashion
History of architecture
History of science in the Renaissance
History of the European Union
History of the Jews in Europe
Holocene
Holy Land
Holy Roman Emperor
Holy Roman Empire
Holy See
Homer
Homeric Hymn
Hominini
Homo antecessor
Homo erectus georgicus
Horn of Africa
House of Habsburg
Human rights
Humanism
Hungarian diaspora
Hungarian language
Hungary
Huns
Hunter-gatherer
Hyperborea
ISBN (identifier)
ISSN (identifier)
Iberia
Iberian Peninsula
Ibero-America
Iceland
Icelandic diaspora
Immigration
Immigration to Europe
Immigration to the Western world
Index of Europe-related articles
India
Indian Ocean
Indian subcontinent
Indo-European languages
Indo-European migrations
Industrial Revolution
Information Age
Infrastructure of Europe
Inner Asia
Inquisition
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
Interglacial
International Monetary Fund
International Organisation for Migration
International dollar
International law
International organisations in Europe
International r
eaction to the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence
International recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
International status and usage of the euro
Internet
Interwar period
Invasion of Poland
Iranian Plateau
Ireland
Irish diaspora
Irish language
Iron Age Italy
Iron Curtain
Irreligion
Irreligion in Europe
Irtysh River
Isaac Newton
Islam
Islam in Europe
Islam in Russia
Islamic culture
Islamic world
Island
Islands of Africa
Isle of Man
Isles of Scilly
Isleños
Istanbul
Isturitz
Italian Peninsula
Italian Renaissance
Italian diaspora
Italian language
Italian unification
Italy
Italy (geographical region)
Ivan III the Great
Ivan the Terrible
J. G. A. Pocock
JSTOR (identifier)
Jacob Burckhardt
Jan Mayen Microcontinent
Japheth
Jersey
Jerusalem
Jerzy Lukowski
Jewish culture
Jewish population
John Cary
Joseph Stalin
Juan Sebastián Elcano
Jubilees
Judaism
Judeo-Christian ethics
Justinian I
Kalach-na-Donu
Kalahari Craton
Kara Sea
Karachay-Balkar language
Kartvelian languages
Kashubian diaspora
Katakana
Kazakh Khana
te
Kazakh language
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstania
Kenorland
Kepler
Kerch Strait
Kerguelen Plateau
Kiev
Kievan Rus'
Kingdom of Asturias
Kingdom of Croatia (925–1102)
Kingdom of Galicia
Kingdom of Great Britain
Kingdom of Italy
Kingdom of Leon
Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)
Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Klaipėda
Komi language
Kosovo
Kraków
Kuban (river)
Kulak
Kumari Kandam
Kuma–Manych Depression
Kumyk language
Kyiv
Köppen climate classification
Lancaster House Treaties
Land and water hemispheres
Language
Language isolate
Languages of Europe
Laramidia
Lascaux
Last Glacial Maximum refugia
Last glacial period
Late 2000s recession in Europe
Late Antiquity
Late Middle Ages
Late Tertiary
Late antiquity
Late modern period
Latgalian diaspora
Latin
Latin America
Latin America and the Caribbean
Latin Christendom
Latin Church
Latin language
Latin script
Latitudes
Latvia
Latvian diaspora
Latvian language
Laurasia
Laurentia
Law in Europe
Legacy of the Roman Empire
Legal status of tattooing in Euro
pean countries
Lemuria
Leonardo da Vinci
Leper
Lerwick
Levant
Levantine Sea
Lezgian language
Liberalism
Library of Congress
Liechtenstein
Ligurian Sea
Linear Pottery culture
Lisbon
List of European cities by population within city limits
List of European countries by area
List of European countries by average wage
List of European countries by life expectancy
List of European countries by membership in international organisations
List of European countries by minimum wage
List of European countries by number of Internet users
List of European countries by population
List of European folk music traditions
List of European languages by number of speakers
List of European television stations
List of IMF ranked countries by past and projected GDP (nominal)
List of administrative divisions by country
List of continents and continental subregions by population
List of continents by GDP
List of countries and territories by fertility rate
List of countries by GDP (PPP)
List of countries by GDP (nominal)
List of count
ries by area
List of countries by forest area
List of countries by past and projected GDP (PPP)
List of countries by population
List of countries by population density
List of countries spanning more than one continent
List of endangered languages in Europe
List of epidemics
List of film festivals in Europe
List of former European colonies
List of islands in the Pacific Ocean
List of islands of Europe
List of lakes
List of lost lands
List of metropolitan areas in Europe
List of mountain ranges
List of mythological places
List of names of European cities in different languages
List of predecessors of sovereign states in Europe
List of rivers of Europe
List of seas
List of sovereign states
List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe
List of sovereign states by date of formation
List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (PPP)
List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (PPP) per capita
List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (nominal)
List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (nominal) per capit
a
List of sovereign states in Europe by GNI (PPP) per capita
List of sovereign states in Europe by GNI (nominal) per capita
List of sovereign states in Europe by Human Development Index
List of sovereign states in Europe by Press Freedom Index
List of sovereign states in Europe by budget revenues
List of sovereign states in Europe by budget revenues per capita
List of sovereign states in Europe by unemployment rate
List of states with limited recognition
List of transcontinental countries
List of unrecognised countries
List of urban areas in Europe
List of villages in Europe
Lists of cities in Europe
Lithuania
Lithuanian language
Lithuanians
Livestock
Ljubljana
London
Los Angeles Times
Low Countries
Lublin Triangle
Luhansk People's Republic
Lutheranism
Luxembourg
Luxembourg City
Luxembourgers
Macedonia (ancient kingdom)
Macedonian diaspora
Macmillan Publishers (United States)
Madagascar
Madeira
Madrid
Maghreb
Magna Carta
Magyars
Mainland Southeast Asia
Malta
Maltese language
Maltese people
Mandaeism
Manx lang
uage
Manx people
Maps of present-day countries and dependencies
Marcus Aurelius
Mari language
Mariana Trench
Mariehamn
Maritime Republics
Maritime Southeast Asia
Maritime republics
Maritsa
Marshall Plan
Marten
Martin Litchfield West
Martin Luther
Mashriq
Mauritia (microcontinent)
Medici
Medieval demography
Mediterranean Basin
Mediterranean Sea
Mediterranean basin
Mediterranean coast
Mediterranean forest
Megacity
Megalithic
Megalithic Temples of Malta
Megalithic tomb
Melanesia
Melilla
Melvin Ember
Member state of the European Union
Meropis
Mesoamerica
Methodism
Metropolitan France
Michelangelo
Microcontinent
Micronesia
Mid-Atlantic (United States)
Middle Ages
Middle America (Americas)
Middle East
Middle East and North Africa
Midwestern United States
Migration Period
Mikhail Gorbachev
Milan
Military history of Europe
Military of Europe
Mingrelian language
Mining
Minoan civilization
Minsk
Mitrovica, Kosovo
Modern era
Modern history
Modern paganism
Modernism
Modernity
Moksha language
Moldavia
Moldova
Moldovan dia
spora
Mollusc
Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
Monaco
Monarchies in Europe
Monarchy
Monasticism
Mongol invasion of Europe
Mongol invasion of Rus
Montane forest
Montenegro
Moors
Moscow
Mountain states
Mu (mythical lost continent)
Mugodzhar Hills
Munich Agreement
Music
Muslim
Muslim conquest of Persia
Muslims
Mycenean Greece
NATO
NKVD
Nagorno-Karabakh
Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic
Naples
Napoleon
Napoleonic Empire
Napoleonic Wars
Napoleonic code
Nation state
National Geographic Society
National park
National symbol
National symbols of Europe
Natural law
Nature (journal)
Nazi Germany
Neandertal (valley)
Neanderthal man
Near East
Nena (supercontinent)
Neolithic
Neolithic Revolution
Netherlands
New England
New Guinea
New Monarchs
New World
New York City
New Zealand
Nickel
Nicosia
Nile
Ninety-five Theses
Noah
Nobility
Nogai Horde
Nogai language
Nordic Council
Nordic countries
Norman Cantor
Norman F. Cantor
Normandy landings
North Africa
North America
North Asia
North Atlantic Current
North Atlantic Ocean
North Caucasus
N
orth China Craton
North German Plain
North Macedonia
North Nicosia
North Sea
Northeast Asia
Northeast Caucasian languages
Northeastern United States
Northern America
Northern Atlantic
Northern Canada
Northern Cyprus
Northern Europe
Northern Hemisphere
Northern Ireland
Northern Mexico
Northern South America
Northwest Africa
Northwest Caucasian languages
Northwestern Europe
Norway
Norwegian Sea
Norwegian diaspora
Novopangaea
Nuclear proliferation
Nuuk
OCLC (identifier)
Oak
Ob River
Obshchy Syrt
Ocean
Oceania
Octopuses
Old Norse religion
Old World
Olive
Omnivore
Online Etymology Dictionary
Open Balkan
Operation Barbarossa
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe statistics
Organization of American States
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Orient
Oslo
Ostrogoths
Ottoman Empire
Ottoman wars in Europe
Oulu
Outline of Europe
Owl
Oxford University Press
PMC (identifier)
PMID (identifier)
Pacific Islands Forum
Pacific Northwest
Pacific Oc
ean
Paganism
Pale of Settlement
Pampia
Pan-European Picnic
Pan-European identity
Pandemic
Pangaea
Pangaea Proxima
Pangea
Pannonian Avars
Pannotia
Papacy
Paradox of tolerance
Paris
Parliament
Parliamentary democracy
Parthenon
Partitions of Poland
Patagonia
Pax Europaea
Pax romana
Peace of Westphalia
Pechenegs
Penguin Books
Pentecostalism
Periods in Western art history
Peritrope
Permanent Committee on Geographical Names (Germany)
Persecution of Jews
Persecution of early Christians in the Roman Empire
Peruvians of European descent
Peter N. Peregrine
Peter Simon Pallas
Peter the Great
Petrarch
Pew Research Center
Phantom island
Philip II of France
Philip II of Spain
Philip Johan von Strahlenberg
Philosophy
Philosophy of science
Phoenicia
Phoenician language
Phoenicians
Phoney War
Physical geography
Phytoplankton
Picts
Pillars of Hercules
Pine
Pinophyta
Plain
Plantation
Plato
Platonic Academy
Pleistocene
Podgorica
Poland
Polar bear
Polar regions of Earth
Polis
Polish diaspora
Polish language
Polish–Lithuanian Co
mmonwealth
Politics
Politics of Europe
Politics of the European Union
Polynesia
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Pope
Pope Urban II
Population decline
Population density
Population growth
Population transfer in the Soviet Union
Portugal
Portuguese America
Portuguese Empire
Portuguese diaspora
Posidonius
Post-Soviet states
Post-classical
Post-structuralism
Post–Cold War era
Potential enlargement of the European Union
Prague
Precarious work
Predator
Prehistoric Europe
Prevailing westerlies
Principality of Serbia
Principality of Serbia (early medieval)
Pristina
Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia
Protestant
Protestant reformation
Protestantism
Proto-Indo-European mythology
Prussia
Ptolemy
Public Health Act of 1875
Purchasing power parity
Pyrenees
Pythagoras
Quaternary glaciation
Quattrocento
Quebec diaspora
Rainforest
Raphael
Rastafari
Rationalism
Real wages
Reconquista
Red fox
Reformation
Reformed faith
Refugee
Regions of Europe
Regions of South Asia
Reign of Terror
Relativism
Religion in Europe
Religion in ancient Ro
me
Renaissance
Renaissance art
Renaissance humanism
Renaissance of the 12th century
Republic
Republic of Ireland
Republic of Kalmykia
Retirement in Europe
Revolutions of 1848
Revolutions of 1989
Reykjavík
Rhine
Rhineland
Richard J. C. Atkinson
Riga
Right to life
Right to property
Ring of Fire
Rioni River
Riparo Mochi
Robert I. Frost
Robert S. P. Beekes
Robert Wokler
Roberto Weiss
Rodinia
Role of Christianity in civilization
Roman Britain
Roman Catholic Church
Roman Empire
Roman Italy
Roman Republic
Roman architecture
Roman engineering
Roman era
Roman law
Romance-speaking Europe
Romance languages
Romania
Romanian diaspora
Romanian language
Romanization (cultural)
Romano-Germanic culture
Romanticism
Rome
Royal family
Rule of law
Russia
Russian Academy of Sciences
Russian Civil War
Russian Empire
Russian Empire Census
Russian Far East
Russian Foreign Ministry
Russian Orthodox Church
Russian Revolution
Russian diaspora
Russian famine of 1921
Russian invasion of Ukraine
Russian language
Russians
Russo-Turkish War
 (1768–1774)
Russo-Ukrainian War
S2CID (identifier)
SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant
SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant
Saarland
Sahara
Sahara desert
Sahul
Sahul Shelf
Saint Helier
Saint Petersburg
Samara Bend
Samaritanism
San Marino
Sarajevo
Sark
Sarmatian craton
Sasanids
Saxons
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Mountains
Scandinavian Peninsula
Schengen Area
Scholasticism
School of Athens
Science in the Renaissance
Scientific Revolution
Scientific revolution
Scotland
Scottish Gaelic
Scottish Highlands
Scottish diaspora
Scottish people
Sculpture
Sea
Sea level rise
Sea of Azov
Second Northern War
Second Polish Republic
Second World War
Secular humanism
Secularism
Semitic language
Serafimovich (town)
Serbia
Serbian Campaign of World War I
Serbian Empire
Serbian Revolution
Serbian diaspora
Serbo-Croatian
Seven Years' War
Seychelles Microcontinent
Shem
Shock therapy (economics)
Siberia
Siberia (continent)
Siege of Constantinople (1204)
Siege of Constantinople (717–718)
Simon Schama
Sint Maarten
Skopje
Slavery in the Ottoman Empire
Sl
avic Europe
Slavic languages
Slavic paganism
Slavic peoples
Slavs
Slovak Republic (1939–1945)
Slovak diaspora
Slovakia
Slovene diaspora
Slovenia
Small tortoiseshell
Social isolation
Social revolution
Socialism
Socrates
Sofia
Solidarity (Polish trade union)
Solutrean
Somali Plate
Sophocles
South Africa
South America
South Asia
South Caucasus
South China Craton
South Ossetia
South Slavs
Southeast Asia
Southeast Europe
Southeastern Europe
Southern Africa
Southern Cone
Southern Europe
Southern Hemisphere
Southern Ocean
Southern Russia
Southern United States
Southwestern United States
Sovereign state
Soviet Union
Soviet famine of 1932-1933
Soviet invasion of Poland
Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)
Spain
Spanish Empire
Spanish Inquisition
Spanish armada
Spanish diaspora
Spanish language
Spanish miracle
Special Relationship
Spiegel Online
Sport in Europe
Spruce
Squid
St. Martin's Press
St. Peter Port
Stalin
Standard Average European
Steppe
Stockholm
Stonehenge
Strabo
Strait of Gibraltar
Strasbourg
Sub
-Saharan Africa
Sub-replacement fertility
Submerged continent
Subregion
Sudetenland
Suez Canal
Sukhumi
Sunda Shelf
Supercontinent
Superpower
Supranational union
Suzdal
Svalbard
Svalbard Treaty
Svan language
Svatopluk I of Moravia
Sweden
Swedish Deluge
Swedish diaspora
Swiss abroad
Switzerland
Symbols of Europe
São Tomé and Príncipe
T. L. Heath
T and O map
Taiga
Tallinn
Tanais
Tancred of Sicily
Tatar language
Tatars
Tbilisi
Telecommunications in the European Union
Temperate
Temperate broadleaf and mixed forest
Temperate broadleaf forest
Temperate climate
Temperate steppe
Temple Works
Terek (river)
Terra Australis
The Decameron
The General Crisis
The Great War
The Guianas
The Hague
The Holocaust
The Moscow Times
The New York Times
The Pittsburgh Press
The World Bank
The World Factbook
Theodosius I
Third-country economic relationships with the European Union
Third Crusade
Thirty Years War
Thrace
Three Seas Initiative
Thucydides
Timeline of Magellan's circumnavigation
Tirana
Tiraspol
Toleration
Toponymy
Total 
fertility rate
Trade union
Transatlantic relations
Transnistria
Transport in Europe
Treaty of Rome
Treaty of Verdun
Treaty of Versailles
Trepča Mines
Trieste
Tsardom of Russia
Tskhinvali
Tundra
Turkey
Turkic languages
Turkic peoples
Turkish Cypriot diaspora
Turkish Straits
Turkish diaspora
Turkish language
Tórshavn
UN
UNESCO
UNHCR
UNICEF
UN M49
UTC+05:00
UTC−01:00
Udmurt language
Ukraine
Ukrainian diaspora
Ukrainian language
Umayyad
Umayyad Caliphate
Umeå
Unfree labour
Unification of Germany
Unincorporated area
Union State
Union of Krewo
United Kingdom
United Nations
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
United Nations geoscheme
United States
United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement
Universal suffrage
University of Colorado Boulder Libraries
University of Groningen
Ur (continent)
Ural (region)
Ural (river)
Ural Mountains
Ural River
Uralic languages
Uruguay
V-Dem Democracy Indices
V-Dem Democracy indices
Vaalbara
Vaduz
Valencia
Valletta
Values (Western philosophy)
Vandals
Vasco da Gama

Vatican City
Venezuelans of European descent
Venice
Vienna
Viking
Vikings
Vilnius
Virulence
Visa policy of the Schengen Area
Visegrád Group
Visigothic Kingdom
Visigoths
Vladimir the Great
Volga Bulgaria
Volga River
Volga–Don Canal
Volgo–Uralia
Volksdeutsche
Voltaire
Walachia
Wales
Wall Street Crash of 1929
Walloon people
War on terror
Warsaw
Warsaw Pact
Wayback Machine
Wealth gap
Weimar Republic
Welsh language
Welsh people
West Africa
West Asia
West Coast of the United States
West Indies
West Nordic Council
West Slavs
West South Central states
Western Asia
Western Bloc
Western Canada
Western Christianity
Western Church
Western Europe
Western European and Others Group
Western Roman Empire
Western Schism
Western Steppe Herders
Western United States
Western astrology
Western canon
Western culture
Western dance (Europe and North America)
Western dress codes
Western esotericism
Western law
Western literature
Western media
Western painting
Western pattern diet
Western philosophy
Western physical culture
Weste
rn religions
Western sports
Western values (West)
Western world
Westernization
Whales
White Brazilians
White Latin American
White South Africans
Winston Churchill
Winter War
Wirtschaftswunder
Wolf
Woolly mammoth
World
World Health Organization
World Tourism Organization
World War I
World War II
World War II casualties
World War II casualties of the Soviet Union
World War II evacuation and expulsion
World population
World war
Yalta Conference
Yamnaya culture
Yerevan
Yugoslav Wars
Yugoslav nationalism
Zagreb
Zealandia
Zinc
Zooplankton
°C
Åland
Åland convention===END===
